This book was born as I was hungry . Let me explain . In the spring of 1996 , my second book , a novel , came out in Canada . It didn't fare well . Reviewers were puzzled , or damned it with faint praise . Then readers ignored it . Despite my best efforts at playing the clown or the trapeze artist , the media circus made no difference . The book did not move . Books lined the shelves of bookstores like kids standing in a row to play baseball or soccer , and mine was the gangly , unathletic kid that no one wanted on their team . It vanished quickly and quietly . The fiasco did not affect me too much . I had already moved on to another story , a novel set in Portugal in 1939 . Only I was feeling restless . And I had a little money . So I flew to Bombay . This is not so illogical if you realize three things : that a stint in India will beat the restlessness out of any living creature ; that a little money can go a long way there ; and that a novel set in Portugal in 1939 may have very little to do with Portugal in 1939 . I had been to India before , in the north , for five months . On that first trip I had come to the subcontinent completely unprepared . Actually , I had a preparation of one word . When I told a friend who knew the country well of my travel plans , he said casually , They speak a funny English in India . They like words like bamboozle . I remembered his words as my plane started its descent towards Delhi , so the word bamboozle was my one preparation for the rich , noisy , functioning madness of India . I used the word on occasion , and truth be told , it served me well . To a clerk at a train station I said , I didn't think the fare would be so expensive . You're not trying to bamboozle me , are you ? He smiled and chanted , No sir ! There is no bamboozlement here . I have quoted you the correct fare . This second time to India I knew better what to expect and I knew what I wanted : I would settle in a hill station and write my novel . I had visions of myself sitting at a table on a large veranda , my notes spread out in front of me next to a steaming cup of tea . Green hills heavy with mists would lie at my feet and the shrill cries of monkeys would fill my ears . The weather would be just right , requiring a light sweater mornings and evenings , and something short sleeved midday . Thus set up , pen in hand , for the sake of greater truth , I would turn Portugal into a fiction . That 's what fiction is about , isn't it , the selective transforming of reality ? The twisting of it to bring out its essence ? What need did I have to go to Portugal ? The lady who ran the place would tell me stories about the struggle to boot the British out . We would agree on what I was to have for lunch and supper the next day . After my writing day was over , I would go for walks in the rolling hills of the tea estates . Unfortunately , the novel sputtered , coughed and died . It happened in Matheran , not far from Bombay , a small hill station with some monkeys but no tea estates . It 's a misery peculiar to would be writers . Your theme is good , as are your sentences . Your characters are so ruddy with life they practically need birth certificates . The plot you've mapped out for them is grand , simple and gripping . You've done your research , gathering the facts historical , social , climatic , culinary that will give your story its feel of authenticity . The dialogue zips along , crackling with tension . The descriptions burst with colour , contrast and telling detail . Really , your story can only be great . But it all adds up to nothing . In spite of the obvious , shining promise of it , there comes a moment when you realize that the whisper that has been pestering you all along from the back of your mind is speaking the flat , awful truth : it won't work . An element is missing , that spark that brings to life a real story , regardless of whether the history or the food is right . Your story is emotionally dead , that 's the crux of it . The discovery is something soul destroying , I tell you . It leaves you with an aching hunger . From Matheran I mailed the notes of my failed novel . I mailed them to a fictitious address in Siberia , with a return address , equally fictitious , in Bolivia . After the clerk had stamped the envelope and thrown it into a sorting bin , I sat down , glum and disheartened . What now , Tolstoy ? What other bright ideas do you have for your life ? I asked myself . Well , I still had a little money and I was still feeling restless . I got up and walked out of the post office to explore the south of India . I would have liked to say , I'm a doctor , to those who asked me what I did , doctors being the current purveyors of magic and miracle . But I'm sure we would have had a bus accident around the next bend , and with all eyes fixed on me I would have to explain , amidst the crying and moaning of victims , that I meant in law ; then , to their appeal to help them sue the government over the mishap , I would have to confess that as a matter of fact it was a Bachelor 's in philosophy ; next , to the shouts of what meaning such a bloody tragedy could have , I would have to admit that I had hardly touched Kierkegaard ; and so on . I stuck to the humble , bruised truth . Along the way , here and there , I got the response , A writer ? Is that so ? I have a story for you . Most times the stories were little more than anecdotes , short of breath and short of life . I arrived in the town of Pondicherry , a tiny self governing Union Territory south of Madras , on the coast of Tamil Nadu . In population and size it is an inconsequent part of India by comparison , Prince Edward Island is a giant within Canada but history has set it apart . For Pondicherry was once the capital of that most modest of colonial empires , French India . The French would have liked to rival the British , very much so , but the only Raj they managed to get was a handful of small ports . They clung to these for nearly three hundred years . They left Pondicherry in 1954 , leaving behind nice white buildings , broad streets at right angles to each other , street names such as rue de la Marine and rue Saint Louis , and kepis , caps , for the policemen . I was at the Indian Coffee House , on Nehru Street . It 's one big room with green walls and a high ceiling . Fans whirl above you to keep the warm , humid air moving . The place is furnished to capacity with identical square tables , each with its complement of four chairs . You sit where you can , with whoever is at a table . The coffee is good and they serve French toast . Conversation is easy to come by . And so , a spry , bright eyed elderly man with great shocks of pure white hair was talking to me . I confirmed to him that Canada was cold and that French was indeed spoken in parts of it and that I liked India and so on and so forth the usual light talk between friendly , curious Indians and foreign backpackers . He took in my line of work with a widening of the eyes and a nodding of the head . It was time to go . I had my hand up , trying to catch my waiter 's eye to get the bill . Then the elderly man said , I have a story that will make you believe in God . I stopped waving my hand . But I was suspicious . Was this a Jehovah 's Witness knocking at my door ? Does your story take place two thousand years ago in a remote corner of the Roman Empire ? I asked . No . Was he some sort of Muslim evangelist ? Does it take place in seventh century Arabia ? No , no . It starts right here in Pondicherry just a few years back , and it ends , I am delighted to tell you , in the very country you come from . And it will make me believe in God ? Yes . That 's a tall order . Not so tall that you can't reach . My waiter appeared . I hesitated for a moment . I ordered two coffees . We introduced ourselves . His name was Francis Adirubasamy . Please tell me your story , I said . You must pay proper attention , he replied . I will . I brought out pen and notepad . Tell me , have you been to the botanical garden ? he asked . I went yesterday . Did you notice the toy train tracks ? Yes , I did . A train still runs on Sundays for the amusement of the children . But it used to run twice an hour every day . Did you take note of the names of the stations ? One is called Roseville . It 's right next to the rose garden . That 's right . And the other ? I don't remember . The sign was taken down . The other station was once called Zootown . The toy train had two stops : Roseville and Zootown . Once upon a time there was a zoo in the Pondicherry Botanical Garden . He went on . I took notes , the elements of the story . You must talk to him , he said , of the main character . I knew him very , very well . He 's a grown man now . You must ask him all the questions you want . Later , in Toronto , among nine columns of Patels in the phone book , I found him , the main character . My heart pounded as I dialed his phone number . The voice that answered had an Indian lilt to its Canadian accent , light but unmistakable , like a trace of incense in the air . That was a very long time ago , he said . Yet he agreed to meet . We met many times . He showed me the diary he kept during the events . He showed me the yellowed newspaper clippings that made him briefly , obscurely famous . He told me his story . All the while I took notes . Nearly a year later , after considerable difficulties , I received a tape and a report from the Japanese Ministry of Transport . It was as I listened to that tape that I agreed with Mr Adirubasamy that this was , indeed , a story to make you believe in God . It seemed natural that Mr Patel 's story should be told mostly in the first person , in his voice and through his eyes . But any inaccuracies or mistakes are mine . I have a few people to thank . I am most obviously indebted to Mr Patel . My gratitude to him is as boundless as the Pacific Ocean and I hope that my telling of his tale does not disappoint him . For getting me started on the story , I have Mr Adirubasamy to thank . For helping me complete it , I am grateful to three officials of exemplary professionalism : Mr Kazuhiko Oda , lately of the Japanese Embassy in Ottawa ; Mr Hiroshi Watanabe , of Oika Shipping Company ; and , especially , Mr Tomohiro Okamoto , of the Japanese Ministry of Transport , now retired . As for the spark of life , I owe it to Mr Moacyr Scliar . Lastly , I would like to express my sincere gratitude to that great institution , the Canada Council for the Arts , without whose grant I could not have brought together this story that has nothing to do with Portugal in 1939 . If we , citizens , do not support our artists , then we sacrifice our imagination on the altar of crude reality and we end up believing in nothing and having worthless dreams . Chapter 1 . My suffering left me sad and gloomy . Academic study and the steady , mindful practice of religion slowly wrought me back to life . I have kept up with what some people would consider my strange religious practices . After one year of high school , I attended the University of Toronto and took a double major Bachelor 's degree . My majors were religious studies and zoology . My fourth year thesis for religious studies concerned certain aspects of the cosmogony theory of Isaac Luria , the great sixteenth century Kabbalist from Safed . My zoology thesis was a functional analysis of the thyroid gland of the three toed sloth . I chose the sloth because its demeanour calm , quiet and introspective did something to soothe my shattered self . There are two toed sloths and there are three toed sloths , the case being determined by the forepaws of the animals , since all sloths have three claws on their hind paws . I had the great luck one summer of studying the three toed sloth in situ in the equatorial jungles of Brazil . It is a highly intriguing creature . Its only real habit is indolence . It sleeps or rests on average twenty hours a day . Our team tested the sleep habits of five wild three toed sloths by placing on their heads , in the early evening after they had fallen asleep , bright red plastic dishes filled with water . We found them still in place late the next morning , the water of the dishes swarming with insects . The sloth is at its busiest at sunset , using the word busy here in the most relaxed sense . It moves along the bough of a tree in its characteristic upside down position at the speed of roughly 400 metres an hour . On the ground , it crawls to its next tree at the rate of 250 metres an hour , when motivated , which is 440 times slower than a motivated cheetah . Unmotivated , it covers four to five metres in an hour . The three toed sloth is not well informed about the outside world . On a scale of 2 to 10 , where 2 represents unusual dullness and 10 extreme acuity , Beebe ( 1926 ) gave the sloths senses of taste , touch , sight and hearing a rating of 2 , and its sense of smell a rating of 3 . If you come upon a sleeping three toed sloth in the wild , two or three nudges should suffice to awaken it ; it will then look sleepily in every direction but yours . Why it should look about is uncertain since the sloth sees everything in a Magoo like blur . As for hearing , the sloth is not so much deaf as uninterested in sound . Beebe reported that firing guns next to sleeping or feeding sloths elicited little reaction . And the sloth 's slightly better sense of smell should not be overestimated . They are said to be able to sniff and avoid decayed branches , but Bullock ( 1968 ) reported that sloths fall to the ground clinging to decayed branches often . How does it survive , you might ask . Precisely by being so slow . Sleepiness and slothfulness keep it out of harm 's way , away from the notice of jaguars , ocelots , harpy eagles and anacondas . A sloth 's hairs shelter an algae that is brown during the dry season and green during the wet season , so the animal blends in with the surrounding moss and foliage and looks like a nest of white ants or of squirrels , or like nothing at all but part of a tree . The three toed sloth lives a peaceful , vegetarian life in perfect harmony with its environment . A good natured smile is forever on its lips , reported Tirler ( 1966 ) . I have seen that smile with my own eyes . I am not one given to projecting human traits and emotions onto animals , but many a time during that month in Brazil , looking up at sloths in repose , I felt I was in the presence of upside down yogis deep in meditation or hermits deep in prayer , wise beings whose intense imaginative lives were beyond the reach of my scientific probing . Sometimes I got my majors mixed up . A number of my fellow religious studies students muddled agnostics who didn't know which way was up , who were in the thrall of reason , that fool 's gold for the bright reminded me of the three toed sloth ; and the three toed sloth , such a beautiful example of the miracle of life , reminded me of God . I never had problems with my fellow scientists . Scientists are a friendly , atheistic , hard working , beer drinking lot whose minds are preoccupied with sex , chess and baseball when they are not preoccupied with science . I was a very good student , if I may say so myself . I was tops at St . Michael 's College four years in a row . I got every possible student award from the Department of Zoology . If I got none from the Department of Religious Studies , it is simply because there are no student awards in this department ( the rewards of religious study are not in mortal hands , we all know that ) . I would have received the Governor General 's Academic Medal , the University of Toronto 's highest undergraduate award , of which no small number of illustrious Canadians have been recipients , were it not for a beef eating pink boy with a neck like a tree trunk and a temperament of unbearable good cheer . I still smart a little at the slight . When you've suffered a great deal in life , each additional pain is both unbearable and trifling . My life is like a memento mori painting from European art : there is always a grinning skull at my side to remind me of the folly of human ambition . I mock this skull . I look at it and I say , You've got the wrong fellow . You may not believe in life , but I don't believe in death . Move on ! The skull snickers and moves ever closer , but that doesn't surprise me . The reason death sticks so closely to life isn't biological necessity it 's envy . Life is so beautiful that death has fallen in love with it , a jealous , possessive love that grabs at what it can . But life leaps over oblivion lightly , losing only a thing or two of no importance , and gloom is but the passing shadow of a cloud . The pink boy also got the nod from the Rhodes Scholarship committee . I love him and I hope his time at Oxford was a rich experience . If Lakshmi , goddess of wealth , one day favours me bountifully , Oxford is fifth on the list of cities I would like to visit before I pass on , after Mecca , Varanasi , Jerusalem and Paris . I have nothing to say of my working life , only that a tie is a noose , and inverted though it is , it will hang a man nonetheless if he 's not careful . I love Canada . I miss the heat of India , the food , the house lizards on the walls , the musicals on the silver screen , the cows wandering the streets , the crows cawing , even the talk of cricket matches , but I love Canada . It is a great country much too cold for good sense , inhabited by compassionate , intelligent people with bad hairdos . Anyway , I have nothing to go home to in Pondicherry . Richard Parker has stayed with me . I've never forgotten him . Dare I say I miss him ? I do . I miss him . I still see him in my dreams . They are nightmares mostly , but nightmares tinged with love . Such is the strangeness of the human heart . I still cannot understand how he could abandon me so unceremoniously , without any sort of goodbye , without looking back even once . That pain is like an axe that chops at my heart . The doctors and nurses at the hospital in Mexico were incredibly kind to me . And the patients , too . Victims of cancer or car accidents , once they heard my story , they hobbled and wheeled over to see me , they and their families , though none of them spoke English and I spoke no Spanish . They smiled at me , shook my hand , patted me on the head , left gifts of food and clothing on my bed . They moved me to uncontrollable fits of laughing and crying . Within a couple of days I could stand , even make two , three steps , despite nausea , dizziness and general weakness . Blood tests revealed that I was anemic , and that my level of sodium was very high and my potassium low . My body retained fluids and my legs swelled up tremendously . I looked as if I had been grafted with a pair of elephant legs . My urine was a deep , dark yellow going on to brown . After a week or so , I could walk just about normally and I could wear shoes if I didn't lace them up . My skin healed , though I still have scars on my shoulders and back . The first time I turned a tap on , its noisy , wasteful , superabundant gush was such a shock that I became incoherent and my legs collapsed beneath me and I fainted in the arms of a nurse . The first time I went to an Indian restaurant in Canada I used my fingers . The waiter looked at me critically and said , Fresh off the boat , are you ? I blanched . My fingers , which a second before had been taste buds savouring the food a little ahead of my mouth , became dirty under his gaze . They froze like criminals caught in the act . I didn't dare lick them . I wiped them guiltily on my napkin . He had no idea how deeply those words wounded me . They were like nails being driven into my flesh . I picked up the knife and fork . I had hardly ever used such instruments . My hands trembled . My sambar lost its taste . Chapter 2 . He lives in Scarborough . He 's a small , slim man no more than five foot five . Dark hair , dark eyes . Hair greying at the temples . Can't be older than forty . Pleasing coffee coloured complexion . Mild fall weather , yet puts on a big winter parka with fur lined hood for the walk to the diner . Expressive face . Speaks quickly , hands flitting about . No small talk . He launches forth . Chapter 3 . I was named after a swimming pool . Quite peculiar considering my parents never took to water . One of my father 's earliest business contacts was Francis Adirubasamy . He became a good friend of the family . I called him Mamaji , mama being the Tamil word for uncle and ji being a suffix used in India to indicate respect and affection . When he was a young man , long before I was born , Mamaji was a champion competitive swimmer , the champion of all South India . He looked the part his whole life . My brother Ravi once told me that when Mamaji was born he didn't want to give up on breathing water and so the doctor , to save his life , had to take him by the feet and swing him above his head round and round . It did the trick ! said Ravi , wildly spinning his hand above his head . He coughed out water and started breathing air , but it forced all his flesh and blood to his upper body . That 's why his chest is so thick and his legs are so skinny . I believed him . ( Ravi was a merciless teaser . The first time he called Mamaji Mr Fish to my face I left a banana peel in his bed . ) Even in his sixties , when he was a little stooped and a lifetime of counter obstetric gravity had begun to nudge his flesh downwards , Mamaji swam thirty lengths every morning at the pool of the Aurobindo Ashram . He tried to teach my parents to swim , but he never got them to go beyond wading up to their knees at the beach and making ludicrous round motions with their arms , which , if they were practising the breaststroke , made them look as if they were walking through a jungle , spreading the tall grass ahead of them , or , if it was the front crawl , as if they were running down a hill and flailing their arms so as not to fall . Ravi was just as unenthusiastic . Mamaji had to wait until I came into the picture to find a willing disciple . The day I came of swimming age , which , to Mother 's distress , Mamaji claimed was seven , he brought me down to the beach , spread his arms seaward and said , This is my gift to you . And then he nearly drowned you , claimed Mother . I remained faithful to my aquatic guru . Under his watchful eye I lay on the beach and fluttered my legs and scratched away at the sand with my hands , turning my head at every stroke to breathe . I must have looked like a child throwing a peculiar , slow motion tantrum . In the water , as he held me at the surface , I tried my best to swim . It was much more difficult than on land . But Mamaji was patient and encouraging . When he felt that I had progressed sufficiently , we turned our backs on the laughing and the shouting , the running and the splashing , the blue green waves and the bubbly surf , and headed for the proper rectangularity and the formal flatness ( and the paying admission ) of the ashram swimming pool . I went there with him three times a week throughout my childhood , a Monday , Wednesday , Friday early morning ritual with the clockwork regularity of a good front crawl stroke . I have vivid memories of this dignified old man stripping down to nakedness next to me , his body slowly emerging as he neatly disposed of each item of clothing , decency being salvaged at the very end by a slight turning away and a magnificent pair of imported athletic bathing trunks . He stood straight and he was ready . It had an epic simplicity . Swimming instruction , which in time became swimming practice , was gruelling , but there was the deep pleasure of doing a stroke with increasing ease and speed , over and over , till hypnosis practically , the water turning from molten lead to liquid light . It was on my own , a guilty pleasure , that I returned to the sea , beckoned by the mighty waves that crashed down and reached for me in humble tidal ripples , gentle lassos that caught their willing Indian boy . My gift to Mamaji one birthday , I must have been thirteen or so , was two full lengths of credible butterfly . I finished so spent I could hardly wave to him . Beyond the activity of swimming , there was the talk of it . It was the talk that Father loved . The more vigorously he resisted actually swimming , the more he fancied it . Swim lore was his vacation talk from the workaday talk of running a zoo . Water without a hippopotamus was so much more manageable than water with one . Mamaji studied in Paris for two years , thanks to the colonial administration . He had the time of his life . This was in the early 1930s , when the French were still trying to make Pondicherry as Gallic as the British were trying to make the rest of India Britannic . I don't recall exactly what Mamaji studied . Something commercial , I suppose . He was a great storyteller , but forget about his studies or the Eiffel Tower or the Louvre or the cafes of the Champs Elysees . All his stories had to do with swimming pools and swimming competitions . For example , there was the Piscine Deligny , the city 's oldest pool , dating back to 1796 , an open air barge moored to the Quai d'Orsay and the venue for the swimming events of the 1900 Olympics . But none of the times were recognized by the International Swimming Federation because the pool was six metres too long . The water in the pool came straight from the Seine , unfiltered and unheated . It was cold and dirty , said Mamaji . The water , having crossed all of Paris , came in foul enough . Then people at the pool made it utterly disgusting . In conspiratorial whispers , with shocking details to back up his claim , he assured us that the French had very low standards of personal hygiene . Deligny was bad enough . Bain Royal , another latrine on the Seine , was worse . At least at Deligny they scooped out the dead fish . Nevertheless , an Olympic pool is an Olympic pool , touched by immortal glory . Though it was a cesspool , Mamaji spoke of Deligny with a fond smile . One was better off at the Piscines Chateau Landon , Rouvet or du boulevard de la Gare . They were indoor pools with roofs , on land and open year round . Their water was supplied by the condensation from steam engines from nearby factories and so was cleaner and warmer . But these pools were still a bit dingy and tended to be crowded . There was so much gob and spit floating in the water , I thought I was swimming through jellyfish , chuckled Mamaji . The Piscines Hebert , Ledru Rollin and Butte aux Cailles were bright , modern , spacious pools fed by artesian wells . They set the standard for excellence in municipal swimming pools . There was the Piscine des Tourelles , of course , the city 's other great Olympic pool , inaugurated during the second Paris games , of 1924 . And there were still others , many of them . But no swimming pool in Mamaji 's eyes matched the glory of the Piscine Molitor . It was the crowning aquatic glory of Paris , indeed , of the entire civilized world . It was a pool the gods would have delighted to swim in . Molitor had the best competitive swimming club in Paris . There were two pools , an indoor and an outdoor . Both were as big as small oceans . The indoor pool always had two lanes reserved for swimmers who wanted to do lengths . The water was so clean and clear you could have used it to make your morning coffee . Wooden changing cabins , blue and white , surrounded the pool on two floors . You could look down and see everyone and everything . The porters who marked your cabin door with chalk to show that it was occupied were limping old men , friendly in an ill tempered way . No amount of shouting and tomfoolery ever ruffled them . The showers gushed hot , soothing water . There was a steam room and an exercise room . The outside pool became a skating rink in winter . There was a bar , a cafeteria , a large sunning deck , even two small beaches with real sand . Every bit of tile , brass and wood gleamed . It was it was ... It was the only pool that made Mamaji fall silent , his memory making too many lengths to mention . Mamaji remembered , Father dreamed . That is how I got my name when I entered this world , a last , welcome addition to my family , three years after Ravi : Piscine Molitor Patel . Chapter 4 . Our good old nation was just seven years old as a republic when it became bigger by a small territory . Pondicherry entered the Union of India on November 1 , 1954 . One civic achievement called for another . A portion of the grounds of the Pondicherry Botanical Garden was made available rent free for an exciting business opportunity and lo and behold India had a brand new zoo , designed and run according to the most modern , biologically sound principles . It was a huge zoo , spread over numberless acres , big enough to require a train to explore it , though it seemed to get smaller as I grew older , train included . Now it 's so small it fits in my head . You must imagine a hot and humid place , bathed in sunshine and bright colours . The riot of flowers is incessant . There are trees , shrubs and climbing plants in profusion peepuls , gulmohurs , flames of the forest , red silk cottons , jacarandas , mangoes , jackfruits and many others that would remain unknown to you if they didn't have neat labels at their feet . There are benches . On these benches you see men sleeping , stretched out , or couples sitting , young couples , who steal glances at each other shyly and whose hands flutter in the air , happening to touch . Suddenly , amidst the tall and slim trees up ahead , you notice two giraffes quietly observing you . The sight is not the last of your surprises . The next moment you are startled by a furious outburst coming from a great troupe of monkeys , only outdone in volume by the shrill cries of strange birds . You come to a turnstile . You distractedly pay a small sum of money . You move on . You see a low wall . What can you expect beyond a low wall ? Certainly not a shallow pit with two mighty Indian rhinoceros . But that is what you find . And when you turn your head you see the elephant that was there all along , so big you didn't notice it . And in the pond you realize those are hippopotamuses floating in the water . The more you look , the more you see . You are in Zootown ! Before moving to Pondicherry , Father ran a large hotel in Madras . An abiding interest in animals led him to the zoo business . A natural transition , you might think , from hotelkeeping to zookeeping . Not so . In many ways , running a zoo is a hotelkeeper 's worst nightmare . Consider : the guests never leave their rooms ; they expect not only lodging but full board ; they receive a constant flow of visitors , some of whom are noisy and unruly . One has to wait until they saunter to their balconies , so to speak , before one can clean their rooms , and then one has to wait until they tire of the view and return to their rooms before one can clean their balconies ; and there is much cleaning to do , for the guests are as unhygienic as alcoholics . Each guest is very particular about his or her diet , constantly complains about the slowness of the service , and never , ever tips . To speak frankly , many are sexual deviants , either terribly repressed and subject to explosions of frenzied lasciviousness or openly depraved , in either case regularly affronting management with gross outrages of free sex and incest . Are these the sorts of guests you would want to welcome to your inn ? The Pondicherry Zoo was the source of some pleasure and many headaches for Mr Santosh Patel , founder , owner , director , head of a staff of fifty three , and my father . To me , it was paradise on earth . I have nothing but the fondest memories of growing up in a zoo . I lived the life of a prince . What maharaja 's son had such vast , luxuriant grounds to play about ? What palace had such a menagerie ? My alarm clock during my childhood was a pride of lions . They were no Swiss clocks , but the lions could be counted upon to roar their heads off between five thirty and six every morning . Breakfast was punctuated by the shrieks and cries of howler monkeys , hill mynahs and Moluccan cockatoos . I left for school under the benevolent gaze not only of Mother but also of bright eyed otters and burly American bison and stretching and yawning orang utans . I looked up as I ran under some trees , otherwise peafowl might excrete on me . Better to go by the trees that sheltered the large colonies of fruit bats ; the only assault there at that early hour was the bats' discordant concerts of squeaking and chattering . On my way out I might stop by the terraria to look at some shiny frogs glazed bright , bright green , or yellow and deep blue , or brown and pale green . Or it might be birds that caught my attention : pink flamingoes or black swans or one wattled cassowaries , or something smaller , silver diamond doves , Cape glossy starlings , peach faced lovebirds , Nanday conures , orange fronted parakeets . Not likely that the elephants , the seals , the big cats or the bears would be up and doing , but the baboons , the macaques , the mangabeys , the gibbons , the deer , the tapirs , the llamas , the giraffes , the mongooses were early risers . Every morning before I was out the main gate I had one last impression that was both ordinary and unforgettable : a pyramid of turtles ; the iridescent snout of a mandrill ; the stately silence of a giraffe ; the obese , yellow open mouth of a hippo ; the beak and claw climbing of a macaw parrot up a wire fence ; the greeting claps of a shoebill 's bill ; the senile , lecherous expression of a camel . And all these riches were had quickly , as I hurried to school . It was after school that I discovered in a leisurely way what it 's like to have an elephant search your clothes in the friendly hope of finding a hidden nut , or an orang utan pick through your hair for tick snacks , its wheeze of disappointment at what an empty pantry your head is . I wish I could convey the perfection of a seal slipping into water or a spider monkey swinging from point to point or a lion merely turning its head . But language founders in such seas . Better to picture it in your head if you want to feel it . In zoos , as in nature , the best times to visit are sunrise and sunset . That is when most animals come to life . They stir and leave their shelter and tiptoe to the water 's edge . They show their raiments . They sing their songs . They turn to each other and perform their rites . The reward for the watching eye and the listening ear is great . I spent more hours than I can count a quiet witness to the highly mannered , manifold expressions of life that grace our planet . It is something so bright , loud , weird and delicate as to stupefy the senses . I have heard nearly as much nonsense about zoos as I have about God and religion . Well meaning but misinformed people think animals in the wild are happy because they are free . These people usually have a large , handsome predator in mind , a lion or a cheetah ( the life of a gnu or of an aardvark is rarely exalted ) . They imagine this wild animal roaming about the savannah on digestive walks after eating a prey that accepted its lot piously , or going for callisthenic runs to stay slim after overindulging . They imagine this animal overseeing its offspring proudly and tenderly , the whole family watching the setting of the sun from the limbs of trees with sighs of pleasure . The life of the wild animal is simple , noble and meaningful , they imagine . Then it is captured by wicked men and thrown into tiny jails . Its happiness is dashed . It yearns mightily for freedom and does all it can to escape . Being denied its freedom for too long , the animal becomes a shadow of itself , its spirit broken . So some people imagine . This is not the way it is . Animals in the wild lead lives of compulsion and necessity within an unforgiving social hierarchy in an environment where the supply of fear is high and the supply of food low and where territory must constantly be defended and parasites forever endured . What is the meaning of freedom in such a context ? Animals in the wild are , in practice , free neither in space nor in time , nor in their personal relations . In theory that is , as a simple physical possibility an animal could pick up and go , flaunting all the social conventions and boundaries proper to its species . But such an event is less likely to happen than for a member of our own species , say a shopkeeper with all the usual ties to family , to friends , to society to drop everything and walk away from his life with only the spare change in his pockets and the clothes on his frame . If a man , boldest and most intelligent of creatures , won't wander from place to place , a stranger to all , beholden to none , why would an animal , which is by temperament far more conservative ? For that is what animals are , conservative , one might even say reactionary . The smallest changes can upset them . They want things to be just so , day after day , month after month . Surprises are highly disagreeable to them . You see this in their spatial relations . An animal inhabits its space , whether in a zoo or in the wild , in the same way chess pieces move about a chessboard significantly . There is no more happenstance , no more freedom , involved in the whereabouts of a lizard or a bear or a deer than in the location of a knight on a chessboard . Both speak of pattern and purpose . In the wild , animals stick to the same paths for the same pressing reasons , season after season . In a zoo , if an animal is not in its normal place in its regular posture at the usual hour , it means something . It may be the reflection of nothing more than a minor change in the environment . A coiled hose left out by a keeper has made a menacing impression . A puddle has formed that bothers the animal . A ladder is making a shadow . But it could mean something more . At its worst , it could be that most dreaded thing to a zoo director : a symptom , a herald of trouble to come , a reason to inspect the dung , to cross examine the keeper , to summon the vet . All this because a stork is not standing where it usually stands ! But let me pursue for a moment only one aspect of the question . If you went to a home , kicked down the front door , chased the people who lived there out into the street and said , Go ! You are free ! Free as a bird ! Go ! Go ! do you think they would shout and dance for joy ? They wouldn't . Birds are not free . The people you've just evicted would sputter , With what right do you throw us out ? This is our home . We own it . We have lived here for years . We're calling the police , you scoundrel . Don't we say , There 's no place like home ? That 's certainly what animals feel . Animals are territorial . That is the key to their minds . Only a familiar territory will allow them to fulfill the two relentless imperatives of the wild : the avoidance of enemies and the getting of food and water . A biologically sound zoo enclosure whether cage , pit , moated island , corral , terrarium , aviary or aquarium is just another territory , peculiar only in its size and in its proximity to human territory . That it is so much smaller than what it would be in nature stands to reason . Territories in the wild are large not as a matter of taste but of necessity . In a zoo , we do for animals what we have done for ourselves with houses : we bring together in a small space what in the wild is spread out . Whereas before for us the cave was here , the river over there , the hunting grounds a mile that way , the lookout next to it , the berries somewhere else all of them infested with lions , snakes , ants , leeches and poison ivy now the river flows through taps at hand 's reach and we can wash next to where we sleep , we can eat where we have cooked , and we can surround the whole with a protective wall and keep it clean and warm . A house is a compressed territory where our basic needs can be fulfilled close by and safely . A sound zoo enclosure is the equivalent for an animal ( with the noteworthy absence of a fireplace or the like , present in every human habitation ) . Finding within it all the places it needs a lookout , a place for resting , for eating and drinking , for bathing , for grooming , etc . and finding that there is no need to go hunting , food appearing six days a week , an animal will take possession of its zoo space in the same way it would lay claim to a new space in the wild , exploring it and marking it out in the normal ways of its species , with sprays of urine perhaps . Once this moving in ritual is done and the animal has settled , it will not feel like a nervous tenant , and even less like a prisoner , but rather like a landholder , and it will behave in the same way within its enclosure as it would in its territory in the wild , including defending it tooth and nail should it be invaded . Such an enclosure is subjectively neither better nor worse for an animal than its condition in the wild ; so long as it fulfills the animal 's needs , a territory , natural or constructed , simply is , without judgment , a given , like the spots on a leopard . One might even argue that if an animal could choose with intelligence , it would opt for living in a zoo , since the major difference between a zoo and the wild is the absence of parasites and enemies and the abundance of food in the first , and their respective abundance and scarcity in the second . Think about it yourself . Would you rather be put up at the Ritz with free room service and unlimited access to a doctor or be homeless without a soul to care for you ? But animals are incapable of such discernment . Within the limits of their nature , they make do with what they have . A good zoo is a place of carefully worked out coincidence : exactly where an animal says to us , Stay out ! with its urine or other secretion , we say to it , Stay in ! with our barriers . Under such conditions of diplomatic peace , all animals are content and we can relax and have a look at each other . In the literature can be found legions of examples of animals that could escape but did not , or did and returned . There is the case of the chimpanzee whose cage door was left unlocked and had swung open . Increasingly anxious , the chimp began to shriek and to slam the door shut repeatedly with a deafening clang each time until the keeper , notified by a visitor , hurried over to remedy the situation . A herd of roe deer in a European zoo stepped out of their corral when the gate was left open . Frightened by visitors , the deer bolted for the nearby forest , which had its own herd of wild roe deer and could support more . Nonetheless , the zoo roe deer quickly returned to their corral . In another zoo a worker was walking to his work site at an early hour , carrying planks of wood , when , to his horror , a bear emerged from the morning mist , heading straight for him at a confident pace . The man dropped the planks and ran for his life . The zoo staff immediately started searching for the escaped bear . They found it back in its enclosure , having climbed down into its pit the way it had climbed out , by way of a tree that had fallen over . It was thought that the noise of the planks of wood falling to the ground had frightened it . But I don't insist . I don't mean to defend zoos . Close them all down if you want ( and let us hope that what wildlife remains can survive in what is left of the natural world ) . I know zoos are no longer in people 's good graces . Religion faces the same problem . Certain illusions about freedom plague them both . The Pondicherry Zoo doesn't exist any more . Its pits are filled in , the cages torn down . I explore it now in the only place left for it , my memory . Chapter 5 . My name isn't the end of the story about my name . When your name is Bob no one asks you , How do you spell that ? Not so with Piscine Molitor Patel . Some thought it was P . Singh and that I was a Sikh , and they wondered why I wasn't wearing a turban . In my university days I visited Montreal once with some friends . It fell to me to order pizzas one night . I couldn't bear to have yet another French speaker guffawing at my name , so when the man on the phone asked , Can I 'ave your name ? I said , I am who I am . Half an hour later two pizzas arrived for Ian Hoolihan . It is true that those we meet can change us , sometimes so profoundly that we are not the same afterwards , even unto our names . Witness Simon who is called Peter , Matthew also known as Levi , Nathaniel who is also Bartholomew , Judas , not Iscariot , who took the name Thaddeus , Simeon who went by Niger , Saul who became Paul . My Roman soldier stood in the schoolyard one morning when I was twelve . I had just arrived . He saw me and a flash of evil genius lit up his dull mind . He raised his arm , pointed at me and shouted , It 's Pissing Patel ! In a second everyone was laughing . It fell away as we filed into the class . I walked in last , wearing my crown of thorns . The cruelty of children comes as news to no one . The words would waft across the yard to my ears , unprovoked , uncalled for : Where 's Pissing ? I've got to go . Or : You're facing the wall . Are you Pissing ? Or something of the sort . I would freeze or , the contrary , pursue my activity , pretending not to have heard . The sound would disappear , but the hurt would linger , like the smell of piss long after it has evaporated . Teachers started doing it too . It was the heat . As the day wore on , the geography lesson , which in the morning had been as compact as an oasis , started to stretch out like the Thar Desert ; the history lesson , so alive when the day was young , became parched and dusty ; the mathematics lesson , so precise at first , became muddled . In their afternoon fatigue , as they wiped their foreheads and the backs of their necks with their handkerchiefs , without meaning to offend or get a laugh , even teachers forgot the fresh aquatic promise of my name and distorted it in a shameful way . By nearly imperceptible modulations I could hear the change . It was as if their tongues were charioteers driving wild horses . They could manage well enough the first syllable , the Pea , but eventually the heat was too much and they lost control of their frothy mouthed steeds and could no longer rein them in for the climb to the second syllable , the seen . Instead they plunged hell bent into sing , and next time round , all was lost . My hand would be up to give an answer and it would be acknowledged with a Yes , Pissing . Often the teacher wouldn't realize what he had just called me . He would look at me wearily after a moment , wondering why I wasn't coming out with the answer . And sometimes the class , as beaten down by the heat as he was , wouldn't react either . Not a snicker or a smile . But I always heard the slur . I spent my last year at St . Joseph 's School feeling like the persecuted prophet Muhammad in Mecca , peace be upon him . But just as he planned his flight to Medina , the Hejira that would mark the beginning of Muslim time , I planned my escape and the beginning of a new time for me . After St . Joseph 's , I went to Petit Seminaire , the best private English medium secondary school in Pondicherry . Ravi was already there , and like all younger brothers , I would suffer from following in the footsteps of a popular older sibling . He was the athlete of his generation at Petit Seminaire , a fearsome bowler and a Powerful batter , the captain of the town 's best cricket team , our very own Kapil Dev . That I was a swimmer made no waves ; it seems to be a law of human nature that those who live by the sea are suspicious of swimmers , just as those who live in the mountains are suspicious of mountain climbers . But following in someone 's shadow wasn't my escape , though I would have taken any name over Pissing , even Ravi 's brother . I had a better plan than that . I put it to execution on the very first day of school , in the very first class . Around me were other alumni of St . Joseph 's . The class started the way all new classes start , with the stating of names . We called them out from our desks in the order in which we happened to be sitting . Each name elicited a tick on a list and a brief mnemonic stare from the teacher . I was terribly nervous . It was my turn . Time to put down Satan . Medina , here I come . I got up from my desk and hurried to the blackboard . Before the teacher could say a word , I picked up a piece of chalk and said as I wrote : My name is Piscine Molitor Patel , known to all as : I double underlined the first two letters of my given name Pi Patel For good measure I added numbers and I drew a large circle , which I then sliced in two with a diameter , to evoke that basic lesson of geometry . There was silence . The teacher was staring at the board . I was holding my breath . Then he said , Very well , Pi . Sit down . Next time you will ask permission before leaving your desk . Yes , sir . He ticked my name off . And looked at the next boy . I was saved . I could breathe . A new beginning . I repeated the stunt with every teacher . Repetition is important in the training not only of animals but also of humans . Between one commonly named boy and the next , I rushed forward and emblazoned , sometimes with a terrible screech , the details of my rebirth . It got to be that after a few times the boys sang along with me , a crescendo that climaxed , after a quick intake of air while I underlined the proper note , with such a rousing rendition of my new name that it would have been the delight of any choirmaster . A few boys followed up with a whispered , urgent Three ! Point ! One ! Four ! as I wrote as fast as I could , and I ended the concert by slicing the circle with such vigour that bits of chalk went flying . When I put my hand up that day , which I did every chance I had , teachers granted me the right to speak with a single syllable that was music to my ears . Students followed suit . Even the St . Joseph 's devils . In fact , the name caught on . Truly we are a nation of aspiring engineers : shortly after , there was a boy named Omprakash who was calling himself Omega , and another who was passing himself off as Upsilon , and for a while there was a Gamma , a Lambda and a Delta . But I was the first and the most enduring of the Greeks at Petit Seminaire . Even my brother , the captain of the cricket team , that local god , approved . He took me aside the next week . What 's this I hear about a nickname you have ? he said . I kept silent . Because whatever mocking was to come , it was to come . There was no avoiding it . I didn't realize you liked the colour yellow so much . The colour yellow ? I looked around . No one must hear what he was about to say , especially not one of his lackeys . Ravi , what do you mean ? I whispered . It 's all right with me , brother . Anything 's better than Pissing . Even Lemon Pie . As he sauntered away he smiled and said , You look a bit red in the face . But he held his peace . And so , in that Greek letter that looks like a shack with a corrugated tin roof , in that elusive , irrational number with which scientists try to understand the universe , I found refuge . Chapter 6 . He 's an excellent cook . His overheated house is always smelling of something delicious . His spice rack looks like an apothecary 's shop . When he opens his refrigerator or his cupboards , there are many brand names I don't recognize ; in fact , I can't even tell what language they're in . We are in India . But he handles Western dishes equally well . He makes me the most zesty yet subtle macaroni and cheese I've ever had . And his vegetarian tacos would be the envy of all Mexico . I notice something else : his cupboards are jam packed . Behind every door , on every shelf , stand mountains of neatly stacked cans and packages . A reserve of food to last the siege of Leningrad . Chapter 7 . It was my luck to have a few good teachers in my youth , men and women who came into my dark head and lit a match . One of these was Mr Satish Kumar , my biology teacher at Petit Seminaire and an active Communist who was always hoping Tamil Nadu would stop electing movie stars and go the way of Kerala . He had a most peculiar appearance . The top of his head was bald and pointy , yet he had the most impressive jowls I have ever seen , and his narrow shoulders gave way to a massive stomach that looked like the base of a mountain , except that the mountain stood in thin air , for it stopped abruptly and disappeared horizontally into his pants . It 's a mystery to me how his stick like legs supported the weight above them , but they did , though they moved in surprising ways at times , as if his knees could bend in any direction . His construction was geometric : he looked like two triangles , a small one and a larger one , balanced on two parallel lines . But organic , quite warty actually , and with sprigs of black hair sticking out of his ears . And friendly . His smile seemed to take up the whole base of his triangular head . Mr Kumar was the first avowed atheist I ever met . I discovered this not in the classroom but at the zoo . He was a regular visitor who read the labels and descriptive notices in their entirety and approved of every animal he saw . Each to him was a triumph of logic and mechanics , and nature as a whole was an exceptionally fine illustration of science . To his ears , when an animal felt the urge to mate , it said Gregor Mendel , recalling the father of genetics , and when it was time to show its mettle , Charles Darwin , the father of natural selection , and what we took to be bleating , grunting , hissing , snorting , roaring , growling , howling , chirping and screeching were but the thick accents of foreigners . When Mr Kumar visited the zoo , it was to take the pulse of the universe , and his stethoscopic mind always I confirmed to him that everything was in order , that everything was order . He left the zoo feeling scientifically refreshed . The first time I saw his triangular form teetering and tottering about the zoo , I was shy to approach him . As much as I liked him as a teacher , he was a figure of authority , and I , a subject . I was a little afraid of him . I observed him at a distance . He had just come to the rhinoceros pit . The two Indian rhinos were great attractions at the zoo because of the goats . Rhinos are social animals , and when we got Peak , a young wild male , he was showing signs of suffering from isolation and he was eating less and less . As a stopgap measure , while he searched for a female , Father thought of seeing if Peak couldn't be accustomed to living with goats . If it worked , it would save a valuable animal . If it didn't , it would only cost a few goats . It worked marvellously . Peak and the herd of goats became inseparable , even when Summit arrived . Now , when the rhinos bathed , the goats stood around the muddy pool , and when the goats ate in their corner , Peak and Summit stood next to them like guards . The living arrangement was very popular with the public . Mr Kumar looked up and saw me . He smiled and , one hand holding onto the railing , the other waving , signalled me to come over . Hello , Pi , he said . Hello , sir . It 's good of you to come to the zoo . I come here all the time . One might say it 's my temple . This is interesting ... He was indicating the pit . If we had politicians like these goats and rhinos we'd have fewer problems in our country . Unfortunately we have a prime minister who has the armour plating of a rhinoceros without any of its good sense . I didn't know much about politics . Father and Mother complained regularly about Mrs . Gandhi , but it meant little to me . She lived far away in the north , not at the zoo and not in Pondicherry . But I felt I had to say something . Religion will save us , I said . Since when I could remember , religion had been very close to my heart . Religion ? Mr Kumar grinned broadly . I don't believe in religion . Religion is darkness . Darkness ? I was puzzled . I thought , Darkness is the last thing that religion is . Religion is light . Was he testing me ? Was he saying , Religion is darkness , the way he sometimes said in class things like Mammals lay eggs , to see if someone would correct him ? ( Only platypuses , sir . ) There are no grounds for going beyond a scientific explanation of reality and no sound reason for believing anything but our sense experience . A clear intellect , close attention to detail and a little scientific knowledge will expose religion as superstitious bosh . God does not exist . Did he say that ? Or am I remembering the lines of later atheists ? At any rate , it was something of the sort . I had never heard such words . Why tolerate darkness ? Everything is here and clear , if only we look carefully . He was pointing at Peak . Now though I had great admiration for Peak , I had never thought of a rhinoceros as a light bulb . He spoke again . Some people say God died during the Partition in 1947 . He may have died in 1971 during the war . Or he may have died yesterday here in Pondicherry in an orphanage . That 's what some people say , Pi . When I was your age , I lived in bed , racked with polio . I asked myself every day , Where is God ? Where is God ? Where is God ? God never came . It wasn't God who saved me it was medicine . Reason is my prophet and it tells me that as a watch stops , so we die . It 's the end . If the watch doesn't work properly , it must be fixed here and now by us . One day we will take hold of the means of production and there will be justice on earth . This was all a bit much for me . The tone was right loving and brave but the details seemed bleak . I said nothing . It wasn't for fear of angering Mr Kumar . I was more afraid that in a few words thrown out he might destroy something that I loved . What if his words had the effect of polio on me ? What a terrible disease that must be if it could kill God in a man . He walked off , pitching and rolling in the wild sea that was the steady ground . Don't forget the test on Tuesday . Study hard , Pi ! Yes , Mr Kumar . He became my favourite teacher at Petit Seminaire and the reason I studied zoology at the University of Toronto . I felt a kinship with him . It was my first clue that atheists are my brothers and sisters of a different faith , and every word they speak speaks of faith . Like me , they go as far as the legs of reason will carry them and then they leap . I'll be honest about it . It is not atheists who get stuck in my craw , but agnostics . Doubt is useful for a while . We must all pass through the garden of Gethsemane . If Christ played with doubt , so must we . If Christ spent an anguished night in prayer , if He burst out from the Cross , My God , my God , why have you forsaken me ? then surely we are also permitted doubt . But we must move on . To choose doubt as a philosophy of life is akin to choosing immobility as a means of transportation . Chapter 8 . We commonly say in the trade that the most dangerous animal in a zoo is Man . In a general way we mean how our species' excessive predatoriness has made the entire planet our prey . More specifically , we have in mind the people who feed fishhooks to the otters , razors to the bears , apples with small nails in them to the elephants and hardware variations on the theme : ballpoint pens , paper clips , safety pins , rubber bands , combs , coffee spoons , horseshoes , pieces of broken glass , rings , brooches and other jewellery ( and not just cheap plastic bangles : gold wedding bands , too ) , drinking straws , plastic cutlery , ping pong balls , tennis balls and so on . The obituary of zoo animals that have died from being fed foreign bodies would include gorillas , bison , storks , rheas , ostriches , seals , sea lions , big cats , bears , camels , elephants , monkeys , and most every variety of deer , ruminant and songbird . Among zookeepers , Goliath 's death is famous ; he was a bull elephant seal , a great big venerable beast of two tons , star of his European zoo , loved by all visitors . He died of internal bleeding after someone fed him a broken beer bottle . The cruelty is often more active and direct . The literature contains reports on the many torments inflicted upon zoo animals : a shoebill dying of shock after having its beak smashed with a hammer ; a moose stag losing its beard , along with a strip of flesh the size of an index finger , to a visitor 's knife ( this same moose was poisoned six months later ) ; a monkey 's arm broken after reaching out for proffered nuts ; a deer 's antlers attacked with a hacksaw ; a zebra stabbed with a sword ; and other assaults on other animals , with walking sticks , umbrellas , hairpins , knitting needles , scissors and whatnot , often with an aim to taking an eye out or to injuring sexual parts . Animals are also poisoned . And there are indecencies even more bizarre : onanists breaking a sweat on monkeys , ponies , birds ; a religious freak who cut a snake 's head off ; a deranged man who took to urinating in an elk 's mouth . At Pondicherry we were relatively fortunate . We were spared the sadists who plied European and American zoos . Nonetheless , our golden agouti vanished , stolen by someone who ate it , Father suspected . Various birds pheasants , peacocks , macaws lost feathers to people greedy for their beauty . We caught a man with a knife climbing into the pen for mouse deer ; he said he was going to punish evil Ravana ( who in the Ramayana took the form of a deer when he kidnapped Sita , Rama 's consort ) . Another man was nabbed in the process of stealing a cobra . He was a snake charmer whose own snake had died . Both were saved : the cobra from a life of servitude and bad music , and the man from a possible death bite . We had to deal on occasion with stone throwers , who found the animals too placid and wanted a reaction . And we had the lady whose sari was caught by a lion . She spun like a yo yo , choosing mortal embarrassment over mortal end . The thing was , it wasn't even an accident . She had leaned over , thrust her hand in the cage and waved the end of her sari in the lion 's face , with what intent we never figured out . She was not injured ; there were many fascinated men who came to her assistance . Her flustered explanation to Father was , Whoever heard of a lion eating a cotton sari ? I thought lions were carnivores . Our worst troublemakers were the visitors who gave food to the animals . Despite our vigilance , Dr . Atal , the zoo veterinarian , could tell by the number of animals with digestive disturbances which had been the busy days at the zoo . He called tidbit itis the cases of enteritis or gastritis due to too many carbohydrates , especially sugar . Sometimes we wished people had stuck to sweets . People have a notion that animals can eat anything without the least consequence to their health . Not so . One of our sloth bears became seriously ill with severe hemorrhagic enteritis after being given fish that had gone putrid by a man who was convinced he was doing a good deed . Just beyond the ticket booth Father had painted on a wall in bright red letters the question : Do You Know Which is the Most Dangerous Animal in the Zoo ? An arrow pointed to a small curtain . There were so many eager , curious hands that pulled at the curtain that we had to replace it regularly . Behind it was a mirror . But I learned at my expense that Father believed there was another animal even more dangerous than us , and one that was extremely common , too , found on every continent , in every habitat : the redoubtable species Animalus anthropomorphicus , the animal as seen through human eyes . We've all met one , perhaps even owned one . It is an animal that is cute , friendly , loving , devoted , merry , understanding . These animals lie in ambush in every toy store and children 's zoo . Countless stories are told of them . They are the pendants of those vicious , bloodthirsty , depraved animals that inflame the ire of the maniacs I have just mentioned , who vent their spite on them with walking sticks and umbrellas . In both cases we look at an animal and see a mirror . The obsession with putting ourselves at the centre of everything is the bane not only of theologians but also of zoologists . I learned the lesson that an animal is an animal , essentially and practically removed from us , twice : once with Father and once with Richard Parker . It was on a Sunday morning . I was quietly playing on my own . Father called out . Children , come here . Something was wrong . His tone of voice set off a small alarm bell in my head . I quickly reviewed my conscience . It was clear . Ravi must be in trouble again . I wondered what he had done this time . I walked into the living room . Mother was there . That was unusual . The disciplining of children , like the tending of animals , was generally left to Father . Ravi walked in last , guilt written all over his criminal face . Ravi , Piscine , I have a very important lesson for you today . Oh really , is this necessary ? interrupted Mother . Her face was flushed . I swallowed . If Mother , normally so unruffled , so calm , was worried , even upset , it meant we were in serious trouble . I exchanged glances with Ravi . Yes , it is , said Father , annoyed . It may very well save their lives . Save our lives ! It was no longer a small alarm bell that was ringing in my head they were big bells now , like the ones we heard from Sacred Heart of Jesus Church , not far from the zoo . We left the house , went through the gate , entered the zoo . It was early and the zoo hadn't opened yet to the public . Animal keepers and groundskeepers were going about their work . I noticed Sitaram , who oversaw the orang utans , my favourite keeper . He paused to watch us go by . We passed birds , bears , apes , monkeys , ungulates , the terrarium house , the rhinos , the elephants , the giraffes . We came to the big cats , our tigers , lions and leopards . Babu , their keeper , was waiting for us . We went round and down the path , and he unlocked the door to the cat house , which was at the centre of a moated island . We entered . It was a vast and dim cement cavern , circular in shape , warm and humid , and smelling of cat urine . All around were great big cages divided up by thick , green , iron bars . A yellowish light filtered down from the skylights . Through the cage exits we could see the vegetation of the surrounding island , flooded with sunlight . The cages were empty save one : Mahisha , our Bengal tiger patriarch , a lanky , hulking beast of 550 pounds , had been detained . As soon as we stepped in , he loped up to the bars of his cage and set off a full throated snarl , ears flat against his skull and round eyes fixed on Babu . The sound was so loud and fierce it seemed to shake the whole cat house . My knees started quaking . I got close to Mother . She was trembling , too . Even Father seemed to pause and steady himself . Only Babu was indifferent to the outburst and to the searing stare that bored into him like a drill . He had a tested trust in iron bars . Mahisha started pacing to and fro against the limits of his cage . I would like to say in my own defence that though I may have anthropomorphized the animals till they spoke fluent English , the pheasants complaining in uppity British accents of their tea being cold and the baboons planning their bank robbery getaway in the flat , menacing tones of American gangsters , the fancy was always conscious . I quite deliberately dressed wild animals in tame costumes of my imagination . But I never deluded myself as to the real nature of my playmates . My poking nose had more sense than that . I don't know where Father got the idea that his youngest son was itching to step into a cage with a ferocious carnivore . But wherever the strange worry came from and Father was a worrier he was clearly determined to rid himself of it that very morning . Getting animals used to the presence of humans is at the heart of the art and science of zookeeping . The key aim is to diminish an animal 's flight distance , which is the minimum distance at which an animal wants to keep a perceived enemy . A flamingo in the wild won't mind you if you stay more than three hundred yards away . Cross that limit and it becomes tense . Get even closer and you trigger a flight reaction from which the bird will not cease until the three hundred yard limit is set again , or until heart and lungs fail . Different animals have different flight distances and they gauge them in different ways . Cats look , deer listen , bears smell . Giraffes will allow you to come to within thirty yards of them if you are in a motor car , but will run if you are 150 yards away on foot . Fiddler crabs scurry when you're ten yards away ; howler monkeys stir in their branches when you're at twenty ; African buffaloes react at seventy five . Our tools for diminishing flight distance are the knowledge we have of an animal , the food and shelter we provide , the protection we afford . When it works , the result is an emotionally stable , stress free wild animal that not only stays put , but is healthy , lives a very long time , eats without fuss , behaves and socializes in natural ways and the best sign reproduces . I won't say that our zoo compared to the zoos of San Diego or Toronto or Berlin or Singapore , but you can't keep a good zookeeper down . Father was a natural . He made up for a lack of formal training with an intuitive gift and a keen eye . He had a knack for looking at an animal and guessing what was on its mind . He was attentive to his charges , and they , in return , multiplied , some to excess . Yet there will always be animals that seek to escape from zoos . Animals that are kept in unsuitable enclosures are the most obvious example . Every animal has particular habitat needs that must be met . If its enclosure is too sunny or too wet or too empty , if its perch is too high or too exposed , if the ground is too sandy , if there are too few branches to make a nest , if the food trough is too low , if there is not enough mud to wallow in and so many other ifs then the animal will not be at peace . It is not so much a question of constructing an imitation of conditions in the wild as of getting to the essence of these conditions . Everything in an enclosure must be just right in other words , within the limits of the animal 's capacity to adapt . A plague upon bad zoos with bad enclosures ! They bring all zoos into disrepute . Wild animals that are captured when they are fully mature are another example of escape prone animals ; often they are too set in their ways to reconstruct their subjective worlds and adapt to a new environment . But even animals that were bred in zoos and have never known the wild , that are perfectly adapted to their enclosures and feel no tension in the presence of humans , will have moments of excitement that push them to seek to escape . All living things contain a measure of madness that moves them in strange , sometimes inexplicable ways . This madness can be saving ; it is part and parcel of the ability to adapt . Without it , no species would survive . Whatever the reason for wanting to escape , sane or insane , zoo detractors should realize that animals don't escape to somewhere but from something . Something within their territory has frightened them the intrusion of an enemy , the assault of a dominant animal , a startling noise and set off a flight reaction . The animal flees , or tries to . I was surprised to read at the Toronto Zoo a very fine zoo , I might add that leopards can jump eighteen feet straight up . Our leopard enclosure in Pondicherry had a wall sixteen feet high at the back ; I surmise that Rosie and Copycat never jumped out not because of constitutional weakness but simply because they had no reason to . Animals that escape go from the known into the unknown and if there is one thing an animal hates above all else , it is the unknown . Escaping animals usually hide in the very first place they find that gives them a sense of security , and they are dangerous only to those who happen to get between them and their reckoned safe spot . Chapter 11 . Consider the case of the female black leopard that escaped from the Zurich Zoo in the winter of 1933 . She was new to the zoo and seemed to get along with the male leopard . But various paw injuries hinted at matrimonial strife . Before any decision could be taken about what to do , she squeezed through a break in the roof bars of her cage and vanished in the night . The discovery that a wild carnivore was tree in their midst created an uproar among the citizens of Zurich . Traps were set and hunting dogs were let loose . They only rid the canton of its few half wild dogs . Not a trace of the leopard was found for ten weeks . Finally , a casual labourer came upon it under a barn twenty five miles away and shot it . Remains of roe deer were found nearby . That a big , black , tropical cat managed to survive for more than two months in a Swiss winter without being seen by anyone , let alone attacking anyone , speaks plainly to the fact that escaped zoo animals are not dangerous absconding criminals but simply wild creatures seeking to fit in . In my younger and more vulnerable years my father gave me some advice that Ive been turning over in my mind ever since . Whenever you feel like criticizing any one , he told me , just remember that all the people in this world havent had the advantages that youve had . 
He didnt say any more , but weve always been unusually communicative in a reserved way , and I understood that he meant a great deal more than that . In consequence , Im inclined to reserve all judgments , a habit that has opened up many curious natures to me and also made me the victim of not a few veteran bores . The abnormal mind is quick to detect and attach itself to this quality when it appears in a normal person , and so it came about that in college I was unjustly accused of being a politician , because I was privy to the secret griefs of wild , unknown men . Most of the confidences were unsought frequently I have feigned sleep , preoccupation , or a hostile levity when I realized by some unmistakable sign that an intimate revelation was quivering on the horizon ; for the intimate revelations of young men , or at least the terms in which they express them , are usually plagiaristic and marred by obvious suppressions . Reserving judgments is a matter of infinite hope . I am still a little afraid of missing something if I forget that , as my father snobbishly suggested , and I snobbishly repeat , a sense of the fundamental decencies is parcelled out unequally at birth .
And , after boasting this way of my tolerance , I come to the admission that it has a limit . Conduct may be founded on the hard rock or the wet marshes , but after a certain point I dont care what its founded on . When I came back from the East last autumn I felt that I wanted the world to be in uniform and at a sort of moral attention forever ; I wanted no more riotous excursions with privileged glimpses into the human heart . Only Gatsby , the man who gives his name to this book , was exempt from my reaction Gatsby , who represented everything for which I have an unaffected scorn . If personality is an unbroken series of successful gestures , then there was something gorgeous about him , some heightened sensitivity to the promises of life , as if he were related to one of those intricate machines that register earthquakes ten thousand miles away . This responsiveness had nothing to do with that flabby impressionability which is dignified under the name of the creative temperament . it was an extraordinary gift for hope , a romantic readiness such as I have never found in any other person and which it is not likely I shall ever find again . No Gatsby turned out all right at the end ; it is what preyed on Gatsby , what foul dust floated in the wake of his dreams that temporarily closed out my interest in the abortive sorrows and short winded elations of men . My family have been prominent , well to do people in this Middle Western city for three generations . The Carraways are something of a clan , and we have a tradition that were descended from the Dukes of Buccleuch , but the actual founder of my line was my grandfathers brother , who came here in fifty one , sent a substitute to the Civil War , and started the wholesale hardware business that my father carries on to day . I never saw this great uncle , but Im supposed to look like him with special reference to the rather hard boiled painting that hangs in fathers office . I graduated from New Haven in 1915 , just a quarter of a century after my father , and a little later I participated in that delayed Teutonic migration known as the Great War . I enjoyed the counter raid so thoroughly that I came back restless . Instead of being the warm centre of the world , the Middle West now seemed like the ragged edge of the universe so I decided to go East and learn the bond business . Everybody I knew was in the bond business , so I supposed it could support one more single man . All my aunts and uncles talked it over as if they were choosing a prep school for me , and finally said , Why ye es , with very grave , hesitant faces . Father agreed to finance me for a year , and after various delays I came East , permanently , I thought , in the spring of twenty two . The practical thing was to find rooms in the city , but it was a warm season , and I had just left a country of wide lawns and friendly trees , so when a young man at the office suggested that we take a house together in a commuting town , it sounded like a great idea . He found the house , a weather beaten cardboard bungalow at eighty a month , but at the last minute the firm ordered him to Washington , and I went out to the country alone . I had a dog at least I had him for a few days until he ran away and an old Dodge and a Finnish woman , who made my bed and cooked breakfast and muttered Finnish wisdom to herself over the electric stove . It was lonely for a day or so until one morning some man , more recently arrived than I , stopped me on the road . How do you get to West Egg village ? he asked helplessly . Richard Parker did not jump into the water after me . The oar I intended to use as a club floated . I held on to it as I reached for the lifebuoy , now vacant of its previous occupant . It was terrifying to be in the water . It was black and cold and in a rage . I felt as if I were at the bottom of a crumbling well . Water kept crashing down on me . It stung my eyes . It pulled me down . I could hardly breathe . If there hadn't been the lifebuoy I wouldn't have lasted a minute . I saw a triangle slicing the water fifteen feet away . It was a shark 's fin . An awful tingle , cold and liquid , went up and down my spine . I swam as fast as I could to one end of the lifeboat , the end still covered by the tarpaulin . I pushed myself up on the lifebuoy with my arms . I couldn't see Richard Parker . He wasn't on the tarpaulin or on a bench . He was at the bottom of the lifeboat . I pushed myself up again . All I could see , briefly , at the other end , was the zebra 's head thrashing about . As I fell back into the water another shark 's fin glided right before me . The bright orange tarpaulin was held down by a strong nylon rope that wove its way between metal grommets in the tarpaulin and blunt hooks on the side of the boat . I happened to be treading water at the bow . The tarpaulin was not as securely fixed going over the stem which had a very short prow , what in a face would be called a snub nose as it was elsewhere around the boat . There was a little looseness in the tarpaulin as the rope went from one hook on one side of the stem to the next hook on the other side . I lifted the oar in the air and I shoved its handle into this looseness , into this life saving detail . I pushed the oar in as far as it would go . The lifeboat now had a prow projecting over the waves , if crookedly . I pulled myself up and wrapped my legs around the oar . The oar handle pushed up against the tarpaulin , but tarpaulin , rope and oar held . I was out of the water , if only by a fluctuating two , three feet . The crest of the larger waves kept striking me . I was alone and orphaned , in the middle of the Pacific , hanging on to an oar , an adult tiger in front of me , sharks beneath me , a storm raging about me . Had I considered my prospects in the light of reason , I surely would have given up and let go of the oar , hoping that I might drown before being eaten . But I don't recall that I had a single thought during those first minutes of relative safety . I didn't even notice daybreak . I held on to the oar , I just held on , God only knows why . After a while I made good use of the lifebuoy . I lifted it out of the water and put the oar through its hole . I worked it down until the ring was hugging me . Now it was only with my legs that I had to hold on . If Richard Parker appeared , it would be more awkward to drop from the oar , but one terror at a time , Pacific before tiger . Chapter 41 . The elements allowed me to go on living . The lifeboat did not sink . Richard Parker kept out of sight . The sharks prowled but did not lunge . The waves splashed me but did not pull me off . I watched the ship as it disappeared with much burbling and belching . Lights flickered and went out . I looked about for my family , for survivors , for another lifeboat , for anything that might bring me hope . There was nothing . Only rain , marauding waves of black ocean and the flotsam of tragedy . The darkness melted away from the sky . The rain stopped . I could not stay in the position I was in forever . I was cold . My neck was sore from holding up my head and from all the craning I had been doing . My back hurt from leaning against the lifebuoy . And I needed to be higher up if I were to see other lifeboats . I inched my way along the oar till my feet were against the bow of the boat . I had to proceed with extreme caution . My guess was that Richard Parker was on the floor of the lifeboat beneath the tarpaulin , his back to me , facing the zebra , which he had no doubt killed by now . Of the five senses , tigers rely the most on their sight . Their eyesight is very keen , especially in detecting motion . Their hearing is good . Their smell is average . I mean compared to other animals , of course . Next to Richard Parker , I was deaf , blind and nose dead . But at the moment he could not see me , and in my wet condition could probably not smell me , and what with the whistling of the wind and the hissing of the sea as waves broke , if I were careful , he would not hear me . I had a chance so long as he did not sense me . If he did , he would kill me right away . Could he burst through the tarpaulin , I wondered . Fear and reason fought over the answer . Fear said Yes . He was a fierce , 450 pound carnivore . Each of his claws was as sharp as a knife . Reason said No . The tarpaulin was sturdy canvas , not a Japanese paper wall . I had landed upon it from a height . Richard Parker could shred it with his claws with a little time and effort , but he couldn't pop through it like a jack in the box . And he had not seen me . Since he had not seen me , he had no reason to claw his way through it . I slid along the oar . I brought both my legs to one side of the oar and placed my feet on the gunnel . The gunnel is the top edge of a boat , the rim if you want . I moved a little more till my legs were on the boat . I kept my eyes fixed on the horizon of the tarpaulin . Any second I expected to see Richard Parker rising up and coming for me . Several times I had fits of fearful trembling . Precisely where I wanted to be most still my legs was where I trembled most . My legs drummed upon the tarpaulin . A more obvious rapping on Richard Parker 's door couldn't be imagined . The trembling spread to my arms and it was all I could do to hold on . Each fit passed . When enough of my body was on the boat I pulled myself up . I looked beyond the end of the tarpaulin . I was surprised to see that the zebra was still alive . It lay near the stern , where it had fallen , listless , but its stomach was still panting and its eyes were still moving , expressing terror . It was on its side , facing me , its head and neck awkwardly propped against the boat 's side bench . It had badly broken a rear leg . The angle of it was completely unnatural . Bone protruded through skin and there was bleeding . Only its slim front legs had a semblance of normal position . They were bent and neatly tucked against its twisted torso . From time to time the zebra shook its head and barked and snorted . Otherwise it lay quietly . It was a lovely animal . Its wet markings glowed brightly white and intensely black . I was so eaten up by anxiety that I couldn't dwell on it ; still , in passing , as a faint afterthought , the queer , clean , artistic boldness of its design and the fineness of its head struck me . Of greater significance to me was the strange fact that Richard Parker had not killed it . In the normal course of things he should have killed the zebra . That 's what predators do : they kill prey . In the present circumstances , where Richard Parker would be under tremendous mental strain , fear should have brought out an exceptional level of aggression . The zebra should have been properly butchered . The reason behind its spared life was revealed shortly . It froze my blood and then brought a slight measure of relief . A head appeared beyond the end of the tarpaulin . It looked at me in a direct , frightened way , ducked under , appeared again , ducked under again , appeared once more , disappeared a last time . It was the bear like , balding looking head of a spotted hyena . Our zoo had a clan of six , two dominant females and four subordinate males . They were supposed to be going to Minnesota . The one here was a male . I recognized it by its right ear , which was badly torn , its healed jagged edge testimony to old violence . Now I understood why Richard Parker had not killed the zebra : he was no longer aboard . There couldn't be both a hyena and a tiger in such a small space . He must have fallen off the tarpaulin and drowned . I had to explain to myself how a hyena had come to be on the lifeboat . I doubted hyenas were capable of swimming in open seas . I concluded that it must have been on board all along , hiding under the tarpaulin , and that I hadn't noticed it when I landed with a bounce . I realized something else : the hyena was the reason those sailors had thrown me into the lifeboat . They weren't trying to save my life . That was the last of their concerns . They were using me as fodder . They were hoping that the hyena would attack me and that somehow I would get rid of it and make the boat safe for them , no matter if it cost me my life . Now I knew what they were pointing at so furiously just before the zebra appeared . I never thought that finding myself confined in a small space with a spotted hyena would be good news , but there you go . In fact , the good news was double : if it weren't for this hyena , the sailor wouldn't have thrown me into the lifeboat and I would have stayed on the ship and I surely would have drowned ; and if I had to share quarters with a wild animal , better the upfront ferocity of a dog than the power and stealth of a cat . I breathed the smallest sigh of relief . As a precautionary measure I moved onto the oar . I sat astride it , on the rounded edge of the speared lifebuoy , my left foot against the tip of the prow , my right foot on the gunnel . It was comfortable enough and I was facing the boat . I looked about . Nothing but sea and sky . The same when we were at the top of a swell . The sea briefly imitated every land feature every hill , every valley , every plain . Accelerated geotectonics . Around the world in eighty swells . But nowhere on it could I find my family . Things floated in the water but none that brought me hope . I could see no other lifeboats . The weather was changing rapidly . The sea , so immense , so breathtakingly immense , was settling into a smooth and steady motion , with the waves at heel ; the wind was softening to a tuneful breeze ; fluffy , radiantly white clouds were beginning to light up in a vast fathomless dome of delicate pale blue . It was the dawn of a beautiful day in the Pacific Ocean . My shirt was already beginning to dry . The night had vanished as quickly as the ship . I began to wait . My thoughts swung wildly . I was either fixed on practical details of immediate survival or transfixed by pain , weeping silently , my mouth open and my hands at my head . She came floating on an island of bananas in a halo of light , as lovely the Virgin Mary . The rising sun was behind her . Her flaming hair looked stunning . I cried , Oh blessed Great Mother , Pondicherry fertility goddess , provider of milk and love , wondrous arm spread of comfort , terror of ticks , picker up of crying ones , are you to witness this tragedy too ? It 's not right that gentleness meet horror . Better that you had died right away . How bitterly glad I am to see you . You bring joy and pain in equal measure . Joy because you are with me , but pain because it won't be for long . What do you know about the sea ? Nothing . What do I know about the sea ? Nothing . Without a driver this bus is lost . Our lives are over . Come aboard if your destination is oblivion it should be our next stop . We can sit together . You can have the window seat , if you want . But it 's a sad view . Oh , enough of this dissembling . Let me say it plainly : I love you , I love you , I love you . I love you , I love you , I love you . Not the spiders , please . It was Orange Juice so called because she tended to drool our prize Borneo orangutan matriarch , zoo star and mother of two fine boys , surrounded by a mass of black spiders that crawled around her like malevolent worshippers . The bananas on which she floated were held together by the nylon net with which they had been lowered into the ship . When she stepped off the bananas into the boat , they bobbed up and rolled over . The net became loose . Without thinking about it , only because it was at hand 's reach and about to sink , I took hold of the net and pulled it aboard , a casual gesture that would turn out to be a lifesaver in many ways ; this net would become one of my most precious possessions . The bananas came apart . The black spiders crawled as fast as they could , but their situation was hopeless . The island crumbled beneath them . They all drowned . The lifeboat briefly floated in a sea of fruit . I had picked up what I thought was a useless net , but did I think of reaping from this banana manna ? No . Not a single one . It was banana split in the wrong sense of the term : the sea dispersed them . This colossal waste would later weigh on me heavily . I would nearly go into convulsions of dismay at my stupidity . Orange Juice was in a fog . Her gestures were slow and tentative and her eyes reflected deep mental confusion . She was in a state of profound shock . She lay flat on the tarpaulin for several minutes , quiet and still , before reaching over and falling into the lifeboat proper . I heard a hyena 's scream . The last trace I saw of the ship was a patch of oil glimmering on the surface of the water . I was certain I wasn't alone . It was inconceivable that the Tsimtsum should sink without eliciting a peep of concern . Right now in Tokyo , in Panama City , in Madras , in Honolulu , why , even in Winnipeg , red lights were blinking on consoles , alarm bells were ringing , eyes were opening wide in horror , mouths were gasping , My God ! The Tsimtsum has sunk ! and hands were reaching for phones . More red lights were starting to blink and more alarm bells were starting to ring . Pilots were running to their planes with their shoelaces still untied , such was their hurry . Ship officers were spinning their wheels till they were feeling dizzy . Even submarines were swerving underwater to join in the rescue effort . We would be rescued soon . A ship would appear on the horizon . A gun would be found to kill the hyena and put the zebra out of its misery . Perhaps Orange Juice could be saved . I would climb aboard and be greeted by my family . They would have been picked up in another lifeboat . I only had to ensure my survival for the next few hours until this rescue ship came . I reached from my perch for the net . I rolled it up and tossed it midway on the tarpaulin to act as a barrier , however small . Orange Juice had seemed practically cataleptic . My guess was she was dying of shock . It was the hyena that worried me . I could hear it whining . I clung to the hope that a zebra , a familiar prey , and an orang utan , an unfamiliar one , would distract it from thoughts of me . I kept one eye on the horizon , one eye on the other end of the lifeboat . Other than the hyena 's whining , I heard very little from the animals , no more than claws scuffing against a hard surface and occasional groans and arrested cries . No major fight seemed to be taking place . Mid morning the hyena appeared again . In the preceding minutes its whining had been rising in volume to a scream . It jumped over the zebra onto the stern , where the lifeboat 's side benches came together to form a triangular bench . It was a fairly exposed position , the distance between bench and gunnel being about twelve inches . The animal nervously peered beyond the boat . Beholding a vast expanse of shifting water seemed to be the last thing it wanted to see , for it instantly brought its head down and dropped to the bottom of the boat behind the zebra . That was a cramped space ; between the broad back of the zebra and the sides of the buoyancy tanks that went all round the boat beneath the benches , there wasn't much room left for a hyena . It thrashed about for a moment before climbing to the stern again and jumping back over the zebra to the middle of the boat , disappearing beneath the tarpaulin . This burst of activity lasted less than ten seconds . The hyena came to within fifteen feet of me . My only reaction was to freeze with fear . The zebra , by comparison , swiftly reared its head and barked . He had changed since his New Haven years . Now he was a sturdy straw haired man of thirty with a rather hard mouth and a supercilious manner . Two shining arrogant eyes had established dominance over his face and gave him the appearance of always leaning aggressively forward . Not even the effeminate swank of his riding clothes could hide the enormous power of that body he seemed to fill those glistening boots until he strained the top lacing , and you could see a great pack of muscle shifting when his shoulder moved under his thin coat . It was a body capable of enormous leverage a cruel body . His speaking voice , a gruff husky tenor , added to the impression of fractiousness he conveyed . There was a touch of paternal contempt in it , even toward people he liked and there were men at New Haven who had hated his guts . Now , dont think my opinion on these matters is final , he seemed to say , just because Im stronger and more of a man than you are . We were in the same senior society , and while we were never intimate I always had the impression that he approved of me and wanted me to like him with some harsh , defiant wistfulness of his own . We talked for a few minutes on the sunny porch . Ive got a nice place here , he said , his eyes flashing about restlessly . Turning me around by one arm , he moved a broad flat hand along the front vista , including in its sweep a sunken Italian garden , a half acre of deep , pungent roses , and a snub nosed motor boat that bumped the tide offshore . It belonged to Demaine , the oil man . He turned me around again , politely and abruptly . Well go inside . We walked through a high hallway into a bright rosy colored space , fragilely bound into the house by French windows at either end . The windows were ajar and gleaming white against the fresh grass outside that seemed to grow a little way into the house . A breeze blew through the room , blew curtains in at one end and out the other like pale flags , twisting them up toward the frosted wedding cake of the ceiling , and then rippled over the wine colored rug , making a shadow on it as wind does on the sea . The only completely stationary object in the room was an enormous couch on which two young women were buoyed up as though upon an anchored balloon . They were both in white , and their dresses were rippling and fluttering as if they had just been blown back in after a short flight around the house . I must have stood for a few moments listening to the whip and snap of the curtains and the groan of a picture on the wall . Then there was a boom as Tom Buchanan shut the rear windows and the caught wind died out about the room , and the curtains and the rugs and the two young women ballooned slowly to the floor . The younger of the two was a stranger to me . She was extended full length at her end of the divan , completely motionless , and with her chin raised a little , as if she were balancing something on it which was quite likely to fall . If she saw me out of the corner of her eyes she gave no hint of it indeed , I was almost surprised into murmuring an apology for having disturbed her by coming in . The other girl , Daisy , made an attempt to rise she leaned slightly forward with a conscientious expression then she laughed , an absurd , charming little laugh , and I laughed too and came forward into the room . Im p paralyzed with happiness . She laughed again , as if she said something very witty , and held my hand for a moment , looking up into my face , promising that there was no one in the world she so much wanted to see . That was a way she had . She hinted in a murmur that the surname of the balancing girl was Baker . ( Ive heard it said that Daisys murmur was only to make people lean toward her ; an irrelevant criticism that made it no less charming . ) At any rate , Miss Bakers lips fluttered , she nodded at me almost imperceptibly , and then quickly tipped her head back again the object she was balancing had obviously tottered a little and given her something of a fright . Again a sort of apology arose to my lips . Almost any exhibition of complete self sufficiency draws a stunned tribute from me . I looked back at my cousin , who began to ask me questions in her low , thrilling voice . It was the kind of voice that the ear follows up and down , as if each speech is an arrangement of notes that will never be played again . Her face was sad and lovely with bright things in it , bright eyes and a bright passionate mouth , but there was an excitement in her voice that men who had cared for her found difficult to forget : a singing compulsion , a whispered Listen , a promise that she had done gay , exciting things just a while since and that there were gay , exciting things hovering in the next hour .
I told her how I had stopped off in Chicago for a day on my way East , and how a dozen people had sent their love through me . Do they miss me ? she cried ecstatically . The whole town is desolate . All the cars have the left rear wheel painted black as a mourning wreath , and theres a persistent wail all night along the north shore . How gorgeous ! Lets go back , Tom . To morrow ! Then she added irrelevantly : You ought to see the baby . Id like to . Shes asleep . Shes three years old . Havent you ever seen her ? Never . Well , you ought to see her . Tom Buchanan , who had been hovering restlessly about the room , stopped and rested his hand on my shoulder . What you doing , Nick ? Im a bond man . Who with ? I told him . Never heard of them , he remarked decisively . This annoyed me . You will , I answered shortly . You will if you stay in the East . Oh , Ill stay in the East , dont you worry , he said , glancing at Daisy and then back at me , as if he were alert for something more . Id be a God damned fool to live anywhere else . At this point Miss Baker said : Absolutely ! with such suddenness that I started it was the first word she uttered since I came into the room . Evidently it surprised her as much as it did me , for she yawned and with a series of rapid , deft movements stood up into the room . Im stiff , she complained , Ive been lying on that sofa for as long as I can remember . Dont look at me , Daisy retorted , Ive been trying to get you to New York all afternoon . No , thanks , said Miss Baker to the four cocktails just in from the pantry , Im absolutely in training . Her host looked at her incredulously . You are ! He took down his drink as if it were a drop in the bottom of a glass . How you ever get anything done is beyond me . I looked at Miss Baker , wondering what it was she got done . I enjoyed looking at her . She was a slender , small breasted girl , with an erect carriage , which she accentuated by throwing her body backward at the shoulders like a young cadet . Her gray sun strained eyes looked back at me with polite reciprocal curiosity out of a wan , charming , discontented face . It occurred to me now that I had seen her , or a picture of her , somewhere before . You live in West Egg , she remarked contemptuously . I know somebody there . Of course I knew what they were referring to , but I wasnt even vaguely engaged . The fact that gossip had published the banns was one of the reasons I had come East . You cant stop going with an old friend on account of rumors , and on the other hand I had no intention of being rumored into marriage . Their interest rather touched me and made them less remotely rich nevertheless , I was confused and a little disgusted as I drove away . It seemed to me that the thing for Daisy to do was to rush out of the house , child in arms but apparently there were no such intentions in her head . As for Tom , the fact that he had some woman in New York . was really less surprising than that he had been depressed by a book . Something was making him nibble at the edge of stale ideas as if his sturdy physical egotism no longer nourished his peremptory heart . Already it was deep summer on roadhouse roofs and in front of wayside garages , where new red gas pumps sat out in pools of light , and when I reached my estate at West Egg I ran the car under its shed and sat for a while on an abandoned grass roller in the yard . The wind had blown off , leaving a loud , bright night , with wings beating in the trees and a persistent organ sound as the full bellows of the earth blew the frogs full of life . The silhouette of a moving cat wavered across the moonlight , and turning my head to watch it , I saw that I was not alone fifty feet away a figure had emerged from the shadow of my neighbors mansion and was standing with his hands in his pockets regarding the silver pepper of the stars . Something in his leisurely movements and the secure position of his feet upon the lawn suggested that it was Mr Gatsby himself , come out to determine what share was his of our local heavens . I decided to call to him . Miss Baker had mentioned him at dinner , and that would do for an introduction . But I didnt call to him , for he gave a sudden intimation that he was content to be alone he stretched out his arms toward the dark water in a curious way , and , far as I was from him , I could have sworn he was trembling . Involuntarily I glanced seaward and distinguished nothing except a single green light , minute and far away , that might have been the end of a dock . When I looked once more for Gatsby he had vanished , and I was alone again in the unquiet darkness . My Finn informed me that Gatsby had dismissed every servant in his house a week ago and replaced them with half a dozen others , who never went into West Egg Village to be bribed by the tradesmen , but ordered moderate supplies over the telephone . The grocery boy reported that the kitchen looked like a pigsty , and the general opinion in the village was that the new people werent servants at all . Next day Gatsby called me on the phone . He was calling up at Daisys request would I come to lunch at her house to morrow ? Miss Baker would be there . Half an hour later Daisy herself telephoned and seemed relieved to find that I was coming . Something was up . And yet I couldnt believe that they would choose this occasion for a scene especially for the rather harrowing scene that Gatsby had outlined in the garden . The next day was broiling , almost the last , certainly the warmest , of the summer . As my train emerged from the tunnel into sunlight , only the hot whistles of the National Biscuit Company broke the simmering hush at noon . The straw seats of the car hovered on the edge of combustion ; the woman next to me perspired delicately for a while into her white shirtwaist , and then , as her newspaper dampened under her fingers , lapsed despairingly into deep heat with a desolate cry . Her pocket book slapped to the floor . When he was nearly thirteen , my brother Jem got his arm badly broken at the elbow . When it healed , and Jem 's fears of never being able to play football were assuaged , he was seldom self conscious about his injury . His left arm was somewhat shorter than his right ; when he stood or walked , the back of his hand was at right angles to his body , his thumb parallel to his thigh . He couldn't have cared less , so long as he could pass and punt . When enough years had gone by to enable us to look back on them , we sometimes discussed the events leading to his accident . I maintain that the Ewells started it all , but Jem , who was four years my senior , said it started long before that . He said it began the summer Dill came to us , when Dill first gave us the idea of making Boo Radley come out . I said if he wanted to take a broad view of the thing , it really began with Andrew Jackson . If General Jackson hadn't run the Creeks up the creek , Simon Finch would never have paddled up the Alabama , and where would we be if he hadn't ? We were far too old to settle an argument with a fist fight , so we consulted Atticus . Our father said we were both right . Being Southerners , it was a source of shame to some members of the family that we had no recorded ancestors on either side of the Battle of Hastings . All we had was Simon Finch , a fur trapping apothecary from Cornwall whose piety was exceeded only by his stinginess . In England , Simon was irritated by the persecution of those who called themselves Methodists at the hands of their more liberal brethren , and as Simon called himself a Methodist , he worked his way across the Atlantic to Philadelphia , thence to Jamaica , thence to Mobile , and up the Saint Stephens . Mindful of John Wesley 's strictures on the use of many words in buying and selling , Simon made a pile practicing medicine , but in this pursuit he was unhappy lest he be tempted into doing what he knew was not for the glory of God , as the putting on of gold and costly apparel . So Simon , having forgotten his teacher 's dictum on the possession of human chattels , bought three slaves and with their aid established a homestead on the banks of the Alabama River some forty miles above Saint Stephens . He returned to Saint Stephens only once , to find a wife , and with her established a line that ran high to daughters . Simon lived to an impressive age and died rich . It was customary for the men in the family to remain on Simon 's homestead , Finch 's Landing , and make their living from cotton . The place was self sufficient : modest in comparison with the empires around it , the Landing nevertheless produced everything required to sustain life except ice , wheat flour , and articles of clothing , supplied by river boats from Mobile . Simon would have regarded with impotent fury the disturbance between the North and the South , as it left his descendants stripped of everything but their land , yet the tradition of living on the land remained unbroken until well into the twentieth century , when my father , Atticus Finch , went to Montgomery to read law , and his younger brother went to Boston to study medicine . Their sister Alexandra was the Finch who remained at the Landing : she married a taciturn man who spent most of his time lying in a hammock by the river wondering if his trot lines were full . When my father was admitted to the bar , he returned to Maycomb and began his practice . Maycomb , some twenty miles east of Finch 's Landing , was the county seat of Maycomb County . Atticus 's office in the courthouse contained little more than a hat rack , a spittoon , a checkerboard and an unsullied Code of Alabama . His first two clients were the last two persons hanged in the Maycomb County jail . Atticus had urged them to accept the state 's generosity in allowing them to plead Guilty to second degree murder and escape with their lives , but they were Haverfords , in Maycomb County a name synonymous with jackass . The Haverfords had dispatched Maycomb 's leading blacksmith in a misunderstanding arising from the alleged wrongful detention of a mare , were imprudent enough to do it in the presence of three witnesses , and insisted that the son of a bitch had it coming to him was a good enough defense for anybody . They persisted in pleading Not Guilty to first degree murder , so there was nothing much Atticus could do for his clients except be present at their departure , an occasion that was probably the beginning of my father 's profound distaste for the practice of criminal law . During his first five years in Maycomb , Atticus practiced economy more than anything ; for several years thereafter he invested his earnings in his brother 's education . John Hale Finch was ten years younger than my father , and chose to study medicine at a time when cotton was not worth growing ; but after getting Uncle Jack started , Atticus derived a reasonable income from the law . He liked Maycomb , he was Maycomb County born and bred ; he knew his people , they knew him , and because of Simon Finch 's industry , Atticus was related by blood or marriage to nearly every family in the town . Maycomb was an old town , but it was a tired old town when I first knew it . In rainy weather the streets turned to red slop ; grass grew on the sidewalks , the courthouse sagged in the square . Somehow , it was hotter then : a black dog suffered on a summer 's day ; bony mules hitched to Hoover carts flicked flies in the sweltering shade of the live oaks on the square . Men 's stiff collars wilted by nine in the morning . Ladies bathed before noon , after their three o'clock naps , and by nightfall were like soft teacakes with frostings of sweat and 
sweet talcum . People moved slowly then . They ambled across the square , shuffled in and out of the stores around it , took their time about everything . A day was twenty four hours long but seemed longer . There was no hurry , for there was nowhere to go , nothing to buy and no money to buy it with , nothing to see outside the boundaries of Maycomb County . But it was a time of vague optimism for some of the people : Maycomb County had recently been told that it had nothing to fear but fear itself . We lived on the main residential street in town Atticus , Jem and I , plus Calpurnia our cook . Jem and I found our father satisfactory : he played with us , read to us , and treated us with courteous detachment . Calpurnia was something else again . She was all angles and bones ; she was nearsighted ; she squinted ; her hand was wide as a bed slat and twice as hard . She was always ordering me out of the kitchen , asking me why I couldn't behave as well as Jem when she knew he was older , and calling me home when I wasn't ready to come . Our battles were epic and one sided . Calpurnia always won , mainly because Atticus always took her side . She had been with us ever since Jem was born , and I had felt her tyrannical presence as long as I could remember . Our mother died when I was two , so I never felt her absence . She was a Graham from Montgomery ; Atticus met her when he was first elected to the state legislature . He was middle aged then , she was fifteen years his junior . Jem was the product of their first year of marriage ; four years later I was born , and two years later our mother died from a sudden heart attack . They said it ran in her family . I did not miss her , but I think Jem did . He remembered her clearly , and sometimes in the middle of a game he would sigh at length , then go off and play by himself behind the car house . When he was like that , I knew better than to bother him . Did you forget your lunch this morning ? asked Miss Caroline . Walter looked straight ahead . I saw a muscle jump in his skinny jaw . Did you forget it this morning ? asked Miss Caroline . Walter 's 
jaw twitched again . Competition is a large part of our life , and our education ; but does it have a positive effect ? Competition can improve the motivation of students , but it can also discourage less skilled students . Also , competition can lead to anger in between the students , especially if they take the competition too seriously . Students that have another student on a similar level of skill could develop the most , but if there is an inequality , neither the most skilled student or the lesser skilled student will develop as much . However its still important to prepare students for life after school , where competition will make up a larger part . There are multiple advantages and disadvantages to competition in education , so is it worth the effort ? Competition has several advantages ; it can motivate students , it can be fun , and it prepares students for life after school . As adults , students will have power , liberty and competition . Therefore , its important that they develop the capacity to compete in a fair and responsible way . Fair competition has been found to help motivate students in a electrical engineering course , and the students that had competition with another similar student had better grades than those that didnt . Motivation is a problem for many students , so competition could help motivate them . Also , competition is very fun , especially for the students that are excelling in a class , so it can serve also as a prize for the students who try the hardest in a class . If students dont have experience with competition , they risk becoming too nice , and others will profit from them unfairly . Competition is an excellent way of learning to win and lose respectfully , and also to learn how to adapt to different situations . In the world , lots of our life is based on competition , like the price of products , jobs , and the economy . In fact , humans evolved to compete . In the past , and now , there are limited resources . Competing for these resources is something humans have done for millennia . Many years ago , a human was born . This man , Lance Winchester , would grow to be the greatest explorer ever . Some child prodigies are adept at art or mathematics . This mans prodigious skill was exploration . He was 14 when he slayed Deirus , the mightiest dragon to terrorize the human realm . The night after he slayed the dragon , he had a dream . The dream told him of the unknown empire off to the east and the great treasures and mighty allies hidden there . He sent off the next day with a troop of his 50 best soldiers and diplomats . When they reached the east edge of the continent they hewed boats from great old oaks and set sail . He was 23 years old when he reached the elven continent . Although the elves were at first wary , Lance wowed them with his tales of adventure ; he even ended up marrying Princess Galien Longfeather , the eldest daughter of the elven royal family . Relations between the two kingdoms went well at first . The elves had gems and magic potions , and the humans had gold and weapons . A lively trading network sprung up . When the king of the humans , King Arturus II died , his son , Prince Rayhon followed in his footsteps , trading with the elves for the first two weeks . 
Inexplicably , one morning , King Rayhon declared that the elves were evil , and must be destroyed . Lance argued with King Rayhon , since he had good friends among the elves , so the king declared him guilty of treason and ordered him and his wife for execution . Now refugees , Lance and Galien escaped to a small town called Riverham to escape execution by the royal courts . Here they lived , far removed from the danger of the war in a peaceful trading town of 2000 people . They had changed their names to escape notice , many years later ; they had a son , a half elf named Blaze . Blaze Woodlocke is destined to embark on an adventure of great proportions , but first he must complete a most difficult task running errands for his parents ! I step into the crowded bazaar , which is filled with what appears to be half of Riverham . What seems like a tiny little town in reality was actually the largest trading hub of Eralen County . On trading day , people came from all over Kiraldan , the kingdom that Eralen County is part of , to exchange goods . Thats why Im here . My parents need some food ; however they feared theyd be discovered if they left the house , after somebody nearly recognized them last week . Id learned how to barter from my dad , and my mom told me what food to buy . I stride confidently towards a less crowded stand selling food . A tall thin man with a greasy mustache heckling behind the stand glances up at me with a sneer . What can I do for ya , ya half blood scum ? he asks . Um , well I need some , uh , berries , and some cheese and some bread . I tell him while handing him a couple bronze coins . Here ya go ! he snickers , handing me some soggy , squished berries , a piece of cheese that wouldnt make a meal for a mouse , and some stale bread . I glare up at him with pure hatred . He laughs . Lookin for a fight , little kiddy ? He asks , threatening me . A crowd of whispering people forms around us . I realize I have no choice but to give up . No I concede . I walk back home , clouds of rage raining tears down my face . I arrive at our house , a humble cottage with red tile paths snaking through tall oak trees . My mother rushes out to greet me , followed closely by my pet German shepherd , Storm . Whats wrong ? My mother asks . What happened ? Its , its nothing . I stammer . They called you names , didnt they ; I knew you shouldnt have gone by yourself . I look into my mothers beautiful blue elven eyes , which I share with her , although I received my fathers shocking red hair . Storm whines and begins to lick my hand , as if trying to cheer me up . My mother also tries to cheer me up . Dad has a surprise ! She says . I dont care . I grumble in between sobs . Oh , come on Blaze . Dads really excited to show you something . My father walks outside , wearing a scabbard on each side , each containing one of his swords , which he cleans and sharpens obsessively , in addition to training with them each day . Even though his red hair is beginning to have tufts of white , his sword skills are as sharp as ever . 
Todays the day you learn how to fight , son ! My dad says , ecstatically . I am overjoyed . I remember 3 years ago , when I was 8 , my dad wanted to start training me . My mom was less than eager . She still didnt enjoy the idea , judging by the look on her face , but at least she was allowing it . After watching my dad train with the sword for years , I was so excited to begin . As long as I can remember I was obsessed with the elegant lines my father carved through the air with his sword , the calm look of concentration displayed on his face . Now its my turn . My dad walks up and unclips one of the scabbards , then hands it to me . He shows me how to draw my sword in a smooth arc to slice through an opponent before they can strike . We practice for hours in the yard , shielded from view by the tall oaks . I slowly become drenched in sweat as he gives me pointers on how to make my strike faster and stronger , as I repeat the motion . After what seems like forever , the sun begins to set . My father tells me that were done for the day . The sword feels extremely heavy in my hand , and as much as I love swinging it around as if Im slaying trolls and giants , Im glad to put it down . You did great ! My father tells me . You sure learned to draw your sword a lot faster than I did ! I go to bed exhausted but happy , excited to keep learning tomorrow . When I wake up , my mother greets me . 
Its time to learn something new ! She says . Since my father gets to teach my swordsmanship , my mother will teach me archery . I learn to fire a bow accurately from over 50 feet away . I find out that I love archery almost as much as I love swords ! I train every day , but I enjoy it . Both are going well , at least according to my parents . Its been almost two weeks since I began training , and already I have mastered many sword strikes . I can nearly beat my mom in an archery contest with my pinpoint precision . On the third week of training , my dad carries out two light bamboo training swords and leather armour . Today were doing some sparring . He says . But first Im going to teach you an old trick of mine . This little trick helped me win a lot of battles . He instructs me to hold my sword up in battle position . He hooked his sword around mine and swung it in a wide circle , first towards me , then back towards himself , yanking the sword from my hand and smoothly grabbing it in his offhand .
Cool ! I manage to exclaim . My father hands me back my sword . You try it on me now . Dont worry about grabbing my sword the first few times , just worry about disarming me . I hook his sword with mine , and then swing it the way he showed me . His sword flies away , landing in the dirt nearby . Here , ready to spar ? My father asks with a smile while handing me the set of leather armour . I gear up as fast as possible , shrugging on the hard leather shirt and strapping into the leather armguards . Ready ? My father asks . Sure . I answer . My father rushes towards me with a barrage of strikes , at a speed I had never seen him attain during practice . I retreat quickly , attempting to block my fathers strikes . Use what I taught you ! He yells in between strikes . I begin to get used to the sensation of battle and remember the tips my father gave me . I block some of his strikes and begin to counter , pushing my father backwards . Thats better ! My father assures me . After a rigorous sparring session , my father relents . Youre improving , son . He says . The next day , my mother wakes me early . The sun has not yet risen , and my bedroom is shrouded in darkness . We have to go , now ! My mother whispers urgently . Why , what happened ? I ask , confused . We were spotted . The kings guard came through the city collecting tax , and he recognized us . He sent for soldiers to arrest us . We have to leave now !
Although I was extremely frightened , I was almost excited . My parents had been training me every day , just in case something like this happened . Now I got to go on a true adventure , like my father had in his youth . Im rushed outside , where my parents take food , weapons and precious belongings and pack them on our three horses , Chief , Arrow and Pride . My mother and my father both pull long cloaks over themselves , disguising their weapons , armour and their faces . My father hands me one , along with the sword I trained with . I pull it over my head . My mother mounts Arrow and my father helps me on to Chief before mounting Pride . Storm bolts out of the house and leaps on to Chief . Good boy . I whisper . Chief , my horse , is tethered to my fathers horse , since Im not the best at riding . We trot out the pathway to our house , immediately turning right , straight towards the deep forest . It seems my parents were wrong . Nobody is waiting for us . As we ride into the forest my father holds up his hand , indicating to stop . We freeze . Both my parents are looking around , as if they sensed something amiss . 
Suddenly , 8 men armed with swords and crossbows step out from the shadows , forming a half circle around us . In a blink of an eye , my mothers bow is drawn . Within a matter of seconds , two shots have been fired . Two men fall to the ground . As the soldiers turn to inspect their following comrades , my father is upon them . Sword flashing , he easily dispatches two soldiers at once . With blinding speed , he executes a quick slice to the neck of the first soldier ; a quick parry and a thrust to the stomach of the other soldier . They both fall . A soldier sneaks behind my father and raises his sword in an effort to strike a killing blow . Before I can warn my father , an arrow strikes the soldier square in the back . Now two men surround my father . Another takes aim with his crossbow , pointing it straight at my mother . My mother cant see him ; shes watching my father and taking aim at his three foes . I see his hand begin to pull on the trigger . No ! I scream . Storm leaps onto the soldier , viciously tearing the crossbow from his hands . I see the man beginning to overpower Storm . I rush over , sword drawn . I slice through the mans chest and push him off of Storm . I hear my mother screaming in the background . I turn to see my father , face drenched in sweat , standing with two men on the ground around him . I see the only remaining man aim his cross bow directly at me . My father rushes towards him , but hes too late . The man fires his crossbow before my father can cut him down . As the bolt flies towards me , I am frozen . I see Storm jump in front of me . Unable to move , I wait for the bolt to hit me . It never does . As I leave my dazed state , I realize that Storm is lying on the ground in front of me , an arrow sticking out of his bloody leg . He whimpers . Can we save him ? I ask my mother pleadingly . I dont know . Perhaps there is a chance I know , Quistine , a great druid healer . He can heal almost any injury . She replies . We must hurry to find Quistine , before his injury becomes infected . Where is he ? I ask . He lived deep in the forest when I was a child . I visited him once . Perhaps he is still there . She says . Follow me . My father picks up Storm and gently sets him down on his horse . We set off at a fast pace , following a small trail through the forest . At times the trail disappears , yet my mother always finds it again . After hours of riding we reach a small elf village . The elves there remember my mother and tell her where to find the great healer . As they converse in Elven , we search for edible berries to stock up for the long journey ahead . A few minutes later , we are ready to leave again . The trail we follow this time brings us up a small hill . At the top of the hill , we turn right and ride until we reach a beautiful green lake . We ride along the edge of the lake . On the other side there is a small clearing , with a wide , old and wrinkled oak tree in the center . Out of its wizened roots comes a tall , hunched over figure with a wrinkly face . He clutches a large walking stick . He stares at us for a moment before his eyes light up as he recognizes my mother . Ah , Queen Longfeather , its been a while . He says . Only about twenty years since I last saw you ! He smiles at us . 
What brings you to my humble abode ? He asks inquiringly as he walks us to a small wooden hut . My father gestures to Storm , who is whimpering in the saddle of my fathers horse . Quistine walks over and inspects Storms wound . This is not good . The infection could kill him . Quistine tells us . Can it be healed ? My mother asks . Perhaps , but the potion is very complicated . Many of the ingredients are very rare . He replies . Tell us what you need and we will find it for you . My father says . We would require leeches , a scale of a black dragon , the roots of a glowing snowdrop flower , a water lily , an eagle feather and the eggshell of a blue heron . He lists the ingredients he needs to create the potion . Luckily I have all of these ingredients but two . The black dragon scale and the snowdrop flower roots . I know there is a large field of snowdrop flowers over the northern mountains , and on your way you can stop by the cave of Dantegelix , an old black dragon . Stealing his scales should be no trouble for spry young fellows like you . Hes only a few stories tall . Itll be a walk in the park .
How far is this field by horse ? My father asks Quistine . Oh , itll take no time at all . About an hour up to ten days at most , that is if you can get past the trolls ! Quistine chuckles at the looks on our faces . Funny old fellows those trolls are , always trying to bash your head in ! My father whispers to my mother . Is this man crazy ? Probably , but hes our only hope . Blaze has no friends . Hed be devastated if Storm died . We must do this . My mother replies . The next morning we leave Storm with Quistine and ride into the mountains . The soft green of the oak trees morphs into the bleak stone face of the mountain peaks . My father takes a scarf and wraps it around his face to protect him from the icy winds . He hands one to me . My mother already has hers on . I hear a distant rumbling mixed in with the howling wind . Dad , do you hear that ? I ask , frightened . He stops and listens . Trolls ! He exclaims . Both he and my mother draw their weapons . I grab my sword . A giant troll reveals itself from behind a mound of rocks . It towers almost twenty feet off the ground . It swings its massive stone club and roars . My father rushes forward on his horse and slices though one of the trolls arms . It cuts a deep gash , however the troll doesnt even notice . My father ducks out of the way of his swinging club and pulls back on the horses reins . Pride rears on his hind legs . My father stands up , on the saddle , runs up the horses back , and in one magnificent leap , lands on the trolls face , impaling it with his sword . The troll falls to the ground and my father jumps off . He cleans his sword before returning it to its scabbard . After a few more hours of riding we see a large ominous cave opening . My father dismounts ,then me and my mother follow . My father lights a match then uses it to light a large torch . Light envelopes the cavern . It appears to be a dead end . A large rock cliff , covered in frost , stands in front of us . Large icicles hang from the top . My father inspects the rock . After wiping the frost off , my mother realises something . Thats not a rock ! Thats the dragon ! My mother screams . Quiet . You could wake it up ! My dad looks slightly stressed . He draws his sword and finds a gleaming black scale . He attempts to pry it out , using his sword as a lever , but he cannot find a crack in the seamless surface . I guess we have to do this the hard way . My father says angrily . He begins to hack at the scale as if hes chopping down a tree . The scale begins to chip , but it doesnt budge . He hacks harder . Finally , the scale falls to the ground . My father bends down and picks it up , when suddenly I hear a growling sound . I think hes waking up ! I yell . The wall of scales in front of us begins to shake . The giant icicles hanging fall to the ground with a crash . We run outside and ride away . I look back and see the dragon beginning to leave its cave . It spreads its wings and begins to pursue us . We ride faster , beginning to cross over the summit of the mountain and descend the other side . I see a large blue field in the distance . I yell to my father . Thats the field of flowers we need !
I hear the rhythmic beat of wings approaching fast . We reach the field and rush through , heading towards the forest , which will provide us cover . The dragon circles overhead . My mother cocks an arrow and points it towards the sky . She fires , but it misses , landing near us . She fires again , this time striking the dragon directly in the eye . It seems to do nothing but enrage the dragon . There was poison in the arrow . My mother tells us . The dragon will be paralyzed in a few minutes . We ride back into the field , trying to grab a flower by the roots . Waves of frost hit the ground around us . I decide to take a risk to get the roots of the flower that Storm so desperately needs . I jump off my horse , rolling clumsily as I hit the ground . I am winded slightly . I pull a flower out and tuck it under my cloak to protect it from the chilling frost . I hear the breaths of the dragon behind me . I duck to the ground , waiting to die . Nothing happens . I turn around and see the dragon lying motionless in a bed of frozen flowers . I catch up with my horse . As I mount my horse , I see that the field is covered almost completely in a thick layer of frost . I got the flower ! I proclaim proudly , holding the flower in my hand for my parents to see . The ride back to Quistines hut is strangely uneventful . The drab gray landscape morphs back to the rich green of the forest . The trees rush by , blurred with speed . When we arrive at Quistines hut , he is waiting outside . I fear that something is wrong . Come quick . Do you have the ingredients ? Quistine asks hurriedly . Yes . We all say in unison . My father pulls the dragon scale out of his cloak . I do the same with the snowdrop flower . Perfect , Ill begin immediately . As Quistine rushes around the hut , I watch Storm . He certainly doesnt look too good . His eyes are red and his fur is matted . I think he is trying to speak with me somehow , as if he is telepathically communicating his pain . My reverie is broken abruptly by Quistine walking into the room , carrying flasks , bowls and herbs , all balanced precariously in his arms . He rubs some brown liquid onto Storms wound and feeds him some herbs . Storms eyes open wide , staring at us . His wound appears to disappear almost instantly . He barks and struggles against Quistine to get to us . I hear Storm speaking in my head again , and this time it is real . I missed you . Storm says to me . I missed you too , Storm . I believe that Santa is similar to Ender because he is under a lot of pressure and many people depend on him to perform . He has a tight schedule and a very difficult task to complete . Billions of people have an expectation of Santa to deliver billions of presents in one night , and Christmas is the most celebrated holiday in the world . Similarly , the world depended on Ender to defeat the Buggers . Ender was under a lot of pressure at Battle School and Command school because from the moment Graff told all of the other kids that Ender was smarter than they were , everyone hated him and tried to bring him down . . Santa has to keep track of all kids in the whole world , watch them all year long to find out whether they have been naughty or nice . He also must read everyone 's Christmas lists to find out what presents they want . In this sense , Santa is a lot like Ender as a commander , because Ender had to control his army and teach them , and later his fleet , where he has to strategize and give orders to his fleet . Ender 's fleet , which follows his orders , helps him to defeat enemies that he could not defeat without them . His fleet is like Santa 's Elves . Santa is the true brains and the leader of the Elves , however they help him to build presents . The Easter Bunny is like Graff and Mazer Rackham , Ender 's teachers , because he does not do as much work as Santa , but less people celebrate him . His job has less risk and less reward . Graff and Mazer Rackham do work and guide Ender , but Ender is the one who is doing the most and the most difficult work . I think the Easter Bunny has it easier because he just delivers eggs to everybody one day of the year , whereas Santa takes all year to prepare to deliver presents , and he must make sure he only delivers presents to the nice kids , something the Easter Bunny does not need to do . The Easter Bunny still does work and although he has it easier , his job is still difficult . That is the same in Ender 's Game , and as the book goes on it becomes clear that the stress is getting to Graff , who begins to gain weight due to his excessive eating to relieve stress . Is Love Blind ? Some people often use the quote ; Love is blind . That quote is idealistic , naive , and for the most part untrue . To make it even worse , the majority of people , real or fictional , who use this quote are hypocrites . Perhaps in the idealistic world of Shakespeare , love comes from inside , but reality isn't quite so perfect . The problem with that statement is that it isn't realistic . In real life , things dont always have a happy ending . Unlike A Midsummer Nights Dream , not everybody finds their true love in the real world . It 's not that there are no perfect clich romances ( that would be a very cynical outlook on life ) , its just that they are the exception , rather than the almost certain happy ending found in many types of media . This ideal is not limited to Shakespeares works either . Modern movies , for example , many Disney movies , to ancient works such as Shakespeares plays , all possess that clich . In A Midsummer 's Night Dream , the characters are perfectly imperfect . That means they are mostly perfect , save for a few flaws to build intrigue and interest in the characters , to help build the plot , and most important of all , to make them relatable to real people . Unfortunately , relatable is not a synonym of identical . Although the characters may have flaws , one aspect the rampant lovers of Shakespeare possess which the average real person does not , is their perfect romantic qualities . They believe lies such as love is blind , true love , and perfection . This can be proved with quotes such as Love looks not with the eyes , but with the mind ; And therefore is wing'd Cupid painted blind : , Love is blind , and lovers cannot see , The pretty follies that themselves commit , and The course of true love never did run smooth ; Love comes from both inside and outside , contrarily to what is frequently portrayed in Disney movies . In Disney movies , the characters say whats inside matters more than what is outside , however , they are being hypocritical . If whats inside matters more , then why are all of the princesses and princes beautiful ? Why do they wear fancy clothes ? Love is not blind . Beauty is in the eye of the beholder , yes , but love is not blind . Physical attraction is important to love . It would be very difficult to love somebody if you couldnt see their beauty , would it not ? In A Midsummer Nights Dream , the characters ( especially Helena ) naively believed that love could simply just change , and that the person they loved would begin to love them back . Although that did happen , it was through the intervention of fairies , which dont frequent lovers slumbers in real life . Indeed , love is a combination of physical , emotional and mental attraction . However , none of these qualities would be so important ( or unimportant ) that they can be so easily dismissed as being blind . To say that is to say , I can hear and feel and think , therefore I must be blind ! That is merely one of the misconceptions of love presented in A Midsummer Nights Dream . If love were to be blind ( hypothetically , let us suppose it is for a moment ) , then the changing of somebodys appearance would have no effect on love , correct ? Although you can get a haircut and you will still be loved , what if you got plastic surgery to look completely different . Would those who love you now still love you ? Perhaps some would , but probably , at least one person out of ten would lose their attraction to you . Now that wouldnt happen if love was blind . I believe that it is reasonable to believe that love isnt solely based on visual beauty , it is still a factor . It may sound harsh to say this , since not all people are beautiful , but that is not the case . Even though people will love you based partially on your appearance , you can still be loved even if youre not beautiful . Though you might not think youre beautiful , someone else probably does , because the clich beauty is in the eye of the beholder is true . Everybody has a different point of view of beauty , just the same as they have different tastes in music and food , different interests and so on . If you dont believe that love isnt blind , and actually has something like 20/20 vision , here is real world , logical proof . Models are clear proof that humans appreciate physical beauty , possibly even more than emotional or mental depth . When somebody sees a beautiful person in a commercial or on a billboard , they generally dont wonder what interests they have , whether they are good people , smart , kind ; they usually just think that that person is beautiful . On the other hand , when somebody sees someone in a commercial that they do not find beautiful , they do not usually wonder if they have similar interests , they just make a mental comment to themselves that that person is not attractive . Although Love is blind is very poetic and makes people feel good , it is not true . The main reason it has prevailed over the years is that it makes us feel good and warm and fuzzy to hear things like love is blind . The problem is the human race as a whole generally likes hearing good things about themselves . Face it ; everybody is at least a bit narcissistic . When people hear things like love is blind , they instantly think to themselves I agree with that . I am a sophisticated non judgemental human being who doesnt care about the superficial elements of a person . Beauty doesnt matter ; its whats inside that is important . They agree with it because it makes them think they are good people . They are , but still , beauty does matter to them , even if its subconsciously . Although it is perfectly fine to utilise such idealistic literary devices such as love is blind in works of fiction , it must be made clear that it is not this way in real life . It is understandable that people want it to be this way , but you must also take into account the many other things people want that are notorious for not existing as of yet . Most people probably wish that poverty and hunger were eradicated ; war ended , and so on . Perhaps someday , these things , as well as the human races love is blind ideal , will become reality . However that is not the case right now . This should not be an excuse to completely dismiss somebody based solely on their physical appearance , but it should be taken into consideration . The most important thing of all though , is to know that you define beauty , not the other way around . An improvement to the love is blind quote could go something like this . Love is not blind , but it has many eyes , and one of them finds you beautiful . It is as if we are walking into the throat of an enormous animal . The tongue of a metal path arcs up and then drops downward into the blackness below . The ceiling closes in , and in some places the heavy cave walls crowd close enough to touch my shoulders . Then the flanks of the limestone open up , and we enter the belly of an expansive chamber . This is where the cave lions are . And the woolly rhinos , mammoths , and bison , a menagerie of ancient creatures , stampeding , battling , stalking in total silence . Outside the cave , where the real world is , they are all gone now . But this is not the real world . Here they remain alive on the shadowed and creviced walls . Around 36000 years ago , someone living in a time incomprehensibly different from ours walked from the original mouth of this cave to the chamber where we stand and , by flickering firelight , began to draw on its bare walls : profiles of cave lions , herds of rhinos and mammoths , a magnificent bison off to the right , and a chimeric creature part bison , part woman conjured from an enormous cone of overhanging rock . Other chambers harbor horses , ibex , and aurochs ; an owl shaped out of mud by a single finger on a rock wall ; an immense bison formed from ocher soaked handprints ; and cave bears walking casually , as if in search of a spot for a long winters nap . The works are often drawn with nothing more than a single and perfect continuous line . In all , the artists depicted 442 animals over perhaps thousands of years , using nearly 400000 square feet of cave surface as their canvas . Some animals are solitary , even hidden , but most congregate in great mosaics like the one I am looking at now , in the deepest part of the cave . Hidden by a rock slide for 22000 years , the cave came to light in December 1994 , when three spelunkers named Eliette Brunel , Christian Hillaire , and Jean Marie Chauvet scrambled through a narrow crevice in a cliff and dropped into the dark entry . Since then , what is now known as the Cave of Chauvet Pont dArc has been ferociously protected by the French Ministry of Culture . We are among the rare few who have been allowed to make the same journey the ancient artists did . The age of these drawings makes youngsters of Egypts storied pyramids , yet every charcoal stroke , every splash of ocher looks as fresh as yesterday . Their beauty whipsaws your sense of time . One moment you are anchored in the present , observing coolly . The next you are seeing the paintings as if all other art all civilization has yet to exist . How did such human accomplishment come to be , so long ago , seemingly out of nowhere ? Until recently it was thought that the drawings found on the walls of well known Upper Paleolithic caves in southern Europe like Altamira , Lascaux , and Chauvet were the expression of a superior kind of human us who had arrived on the continent , driving out the brutish , artless Neanderthals who had been living and evolving there for hundreds of thousands of years . It turns out that the story is a good deal more complicated , and more interesting . It begins , as stories often do , in Africa . Christopher Henshilwood unwinds his six foot five frame , dusts his hands , and gazes out over the Indian Ocean . He stands at the very tip of Africa , and except for the immense , sea battered rocks 80 feet below , nothing lies between his boots and Antarctica but 1 ,500 miles of rolling , white capped sea . Not a bad day , he says , in a baritone you might call godlike , if God had a South African accent . True , it has not been a bad day . Henshilwood , of the University of the Witwatersrand , South Africa , and the University of Bergen , Norway , and his colleagues have been excavating all morning here at a site known as Klipdrift Shelter , adding some stone tools and other new finds to the mounting evidence that modern human beings have inhabited these hills and shallow caves off and on for more than 165000 years . Yet Henshilwood has had better days . Some of his most memorable discoveries have come from Blombos Cave , 28 miles east of Klipdrift , near an area where he used to play as a kid . One day in 2000 his team dug out a small block of engraved red ocher a bit smaller than a flip phone . Ocher is common in this part of Africa and has been used for millennia for everything from body paint to a food preservative . This piece , though , was different : Roughly 75000 years in the past , some clever person had carefully etched on it a pattern of overlapping , parallel , triangular markings . No one knows the meaning of those marks , which have since been found on 13 other pieces of ocher . A signature ? Calculations ? A primeval grocery list ? Whatever their elusive purpose , they were 35000 years older than any other undisputed evidence of symbolic behavior known at the time . Controversy dogged the discovery at first . Some scientists attacked the little rock as a one off , nothing but random scratchings or idiosyncratic doodling . They said it was meaningless , says Henshilwood . They said everything negative you could possibly think . In time , however , others regarded it as a breakthrough . Soon more examples of symbol and ornament were uncovered . Henshilwoods team discovered the shells of little sea snails called Nassarius that were some 75000 years old and perforated , with evidence they had been strung together . Other finds were even older . Nassarius beads have been dated to 82000 years ago at a site called Grotte des Pigeons ( Pigeon Cave ) in Taforalt , Morocco . At the opposite end of the Mediterranean , similar beads from two Israeli caves , Qafzeh and Skhul , were dated to 92000 and at least 100000 years ago . Back in South Africa , a 2010 team led by the University of Bordeauxs Pierre Jean Texier reported finding 60000 year old engraved ostrich eggshells in Diepkloof Rock Shelter north of Cape Town . Meanwhile , Blombos itself kept yielding treasures : finely carved and decorated bone tools , and evidence that as long as 100000 years ago the caves inhabitants had methodically ground ocher into fine powder and mixed it with other ingredients to make a paste . Stored in abalone shells the earliest known containers it could have been used as a decorative paint for bodies , faces , tools , or clothing . In 2009 Henshilwood reported finding more ocher and rocks marked with deliberate cross hatchings , also dating as far back as 100000 years . Compared with the jaw dropping beauty of the art created in Chauvet Cave 65000 years later , artifacts like these seem rudimentary . But creating a simple shape that stands for something else a symbol , made by one mind , that can be shared with others is obvious only after the fact . Even more than the cave art , these first concrete expressions of consciousness represent a leap from our animal past toward what we are today a species awash in symbols , from the signs that guide your progress down the highway to the wedding ring on your finger and the icons on your iPhone . Theres something else telling about these early African and Middle Eastern eruptions of symbolism : They come , and then they go . The beads , the paint , the etchings on ocher and ostrich egg in each case , the artifacts show up in the archaeological record , persist in a limited area for a few thousand years , and then vanish . The same applies to technological innovations . Bone harpoon points , found nowhere else before 45000 years ago , have been uncovered in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in sediments nearly twice that old . In South Africa two relatively complex stone and bone tool traditions appear the Still Bay 75000 years ago and the Howiesons Poort 65000 years ago . But the latter lasted just 6000 years , the former 4000 . Nowhere has a tradition been found to spread across space and through time , gathering richness and diversity , until just before 40000 years ago , when art began to appear more commonly across Africa , Eurasia , and Australasia . As far east as the Indonesian island of Sulawesi ( Celebes ) , stenciled handprints once thought of as an invention of the European Upper Paleolithic were recently shown to be almost 40000 years old . It seems unlikely , therefore , that some genetic switch flipped in our African ancestors to produce the capacity for a new , higher order level of cognition that , once it evolved , produced a lasting change in human behavior . So how do we explain these apparently sporadic flare ups of creativity ? One hypothesis is that the cause was not a new kind of person but a greater density of people , with spikes in population sparking contact between groups , which accelerated the spread of innovative ideas from one mind to another , creating a kind of collective brain . Symbols would have helped cement this collective brain together . When populations again fell below critical mass , groups became isolated , leaving new ideas nowhere to go . What innovations had been established withered and died .

Such theories are difficult to prove the past holds its secrets close . But genetic analyses of modern populations do point to a surge in population in Africa 100000 years ago . A 2009 study conducted by Adam Powell , Stephen Shennan , and Mark G . Thomas of University College London also provides some statistical support for the power of larger populations to generate innovation . And research by Joseph Henrich , now at the University of British Columbia , suggests that as populations shrink , they have an increasingly difficult time holding on to the innovations they invented in the first place . The inhabitants of the island of Tasmania had been making bone tools , cold weather clothing , and fishing equipment for 15000 years before these advances disappear from the archaeological record some 3000 years ago . Henrich argues that when sea levels rose 12000 to 10000 years ago and isolated Tasmania from the rest of the world , the indigenous population of perhaps 4000 individuals was simply not large enough to keep the cultural traditions alive .

Why Africas archaeological record grows dim for 150 centuries is by no means clear . Perhaps pestilence , natural catastrophe , or a sharp swing in climate caused populations to collapse . Yet Francesco dErrico , an archaeologist at the University of Bordeaux , points out that although harsh conditions might spell doom for some cultures , others might be spurred on by them . There is no set formula .

Each region of the globe produced cultures with a number of different trajectories , says dErrico . You could have situations where some short term chaotic disaster might wipe out a culture in one area , but in another , people were able to take advantage of the challenge . He likens it to a recipe . Even if the ingredients are the same , you dont necessarily get the same outcome . Let me show you something . Nicholas Conard glances over his shoulder , then carefully spins the dial on an enormous safe in his office , housed in a 16th century German castle at Tbingen University . From the safe he extracts four small pine boxes and sets them gingerly on the table in front of me . Within each sits a tiny carving : a horse , a mammoth , a bison , and a lion . All are from a German cave called Vogelherd . They display a grace and beauty and playfulness that would make any artist today proud . Yet they are 40000 years old predating the painted masterpieces of Chauvet by 5000 years . Jaw dropping , says Conard , the universitys scientific director of prehistory . Every piece is different . But when you look at them , its obvious they form a coherent whole . The humans who made these objects were part of a population that left the African homeland some 60000 years ago , taking a route through the Middle East and what is now Turkey , along the western fringe of the Black Sea , and up the Danube River Valley . As far as we know , nowhere along that journey did they leave signs of an artistic inclination , not even a piece of marked ocher . But once settled some 43000 years ago in the Lone and Ach River Valleys of southern Germany , they suddenly began to create not crude etchings but fully realistic animal figurines carved out of mammoth tusk . The sources of most of these objects are four caves : Hohle Fels and Geissenklsterle in the Ach Valley , and Hohlenstein Stadel and Vogelherd in the Lone . Not much more than indentations in the rock face , the caves could easily be missed today by someone driving the backcountry roads that wind through Germanys southwestern mountains . Lush and green today , the Ach and Lone Valleys 40000 years ago , at the beginning of a period known as the Aurignacian , were frigid steppe landscapes , dotted with herds of horses , reindeer , and mammoths . In spite of the harsh conditions , the richness of the archaeological sites indicates that population sizes in the Aurignacian were growing . The increases could help explain an apparent flare up of creativity , not unlike those seen earlier in Africa . Maybe the difficulties these European settlers faced , says Conard , led them to share customs that spread from one group , and generation , to the next . In hard times prized carvings and tools could have smoothed the way toward intertribal marriages , trade , and alliances and helped spread new techniques for hunting , building shelters , and making clothing . In Hohle Fels , Conards team recently uncovered some objects whose messages are so sexually explicit they might require a parental warning . One is a carving of a woman with exaggerated breasts and genitalia , found in 2008 . At least 35000 years old , the Venus of Hohle Fels is the most ancient figure yet discovered that is indisputably human . ( Two much earlier figurines from Morocco and what is now Israel may be natural rocks that vaguely resemble the human form . ) Earlier the team had found a polished rod of siltstone , about eight inches long and an inch in diameter , with a ring etched at one end likely a phallic symbol . A few feet away from the Venus figurine , Conards team uncovered a flute carved from a hollow griffon vulture bone , and in Geissenklsterle Cave found three other flutes , one made of ivory and two fashioned from a swans wing bone . They are the oldest known musical instruments in the world . We dont know whether these people had drugs . But they clearly had the sex and rock and roll . Of all the findings to emerge from this period in Germany , none is more fascinating than the Lwenmensch ( Lionman ) of Hohlenstein Stadel Cave , a fantastical sculpture nearly 40000 years old . The original Lwenmensch fragments some 200 of them were discovered in 1939 , on the eve of World War II , by Robert Wetzel , a professor of anatomy at Tbingen University , and a geologist named Otto Vlzing . Wetzel had hoped to work on the pieces of mammoth tusk when the war ended , but they sat untouched in a box for 30 years . Then , in 1969 , archaeologist Joachim Hahn pulled them out and began to piece them together like a three dimensional puzzle . As he did , an extraordinary work of art emerged . At nearly a foot high , the Lwenmensch dwarfs all other carvings so far discovered in the German valleys . But what makes it particularly interesting , says Claus Joachim Kind , an archaeologist at the State Office for Cultural Heritage in Baden Wrttemberg , is that it depicts for the first time a creature that was completely imaginary , part man and part lion . Its creation required not only an unusually inventive mind , but also impressive technical skills and an enormous amount of time an estimated 400 hours . This is not something you do in the evening after work , says Kind . You can feel the power of the figure when you look at it , the seamless melding of a stately human and a ferocious animal . Does the sculpture reflect a wish to bestow a lions power on a human ? Or could it represent a shamans special ability to straddle the spiritual worlds of human and animal ? Hohlenstein Stadel is the only cave in the region where archaeologists have found no everyday tools , bones , or rubbish . It is deeper than the other caves too . Its not difficult to imagine that within its chambers early hunters venerated the Lionman and that Hohlenstein Stadel Cave was an early locus of prehistoric religion . This was a holy place , says Kind .

Conard thinks these people possessed minds as fully modern as ours and , like us , sought in ritual and myth answers to lifes mysteries , especially in the face of an uncertain world . Who governs the migration of the herds , grows the trees , shapes the moon , turns on the stars ? Why must we die , and where do we go afterward ? They wanted answers , he says , but they didnt have any science based explanations for the world around them . Soon after modern humans arrived in Europe , the continents long term residents began to die out . The Neanderthals had emerged in Eurasia some 200000 years earlier . Very little evidence remains that they engaged in symbolic behavior . But the traditional view of Neanderthals as brutish beings incapable of such behavior has been slowly chipped away . Having never reached the population densities that may have triggered the appearance of symbolism in Africa , Neanderthals may never have had much need for it , or revealed it in ways we dont yet understand . For decades the debate over the Neanderthals ability to rise to the standards of their successors centered on a site in France called Grotte du Renne , where artifacts normally associated with Upper Paleolithic modern humans bone tools , distinctive stone blades , and pierced and grooved animal teeth probably worn as pendants were found along with Neanderthal remains . Some researchers reasoned that although the Neanderthals may have been responsible for this tool tradition ( known as the Chtelperronian ) , they were still a species capable only of emulating the fancy craftsmanship of their new modern human neighbors , not inventing it on their own . The more we learn about Neanderthals , including their ability to interbreed with our direct ancestors , the more the copycat explanation for the Chtelperronian sounds like special pleading . The record for Neanderthal symbolic behavior elsewhere may be faint , but it is discernible . Some scholars argue that Neanderthal skeletons found in France and Iraq were deliberately buried . Cut marks recently found on bird wing bones hint that Neanderthals used feathers for ornaments up to 50000 years ago , and a crisscross pattern engraved at least 39000 years ago in the rock of a Neanderthal cave in Gibraltar suggests they could think abstractly . And a single red disk painted on a wall in El Castillo Cave in Spain was recently dated to about 41000 years ago , tantalizingly close to a time when only Neanderthals are known to have been in western Europe . Perhaps they , not us , were the first cave artists . But most of the cave paintings in southern France and Spain were created after the Neanderthals disappeared . Why there ? Why then ? One clue is the caves themselves deeper and more extensive than the ones in the Ach and Lone River Valleys of Germany or the rock shelters of Africa . Tito Bustillo in northern Spain is a half mile from one end to the other . El Castillo and other caves on Monte Castillo dive , twist , and turn into the ground like enormous corkscrews . Frances Lascaux , Grotte du Renne , and Chauvet run football fields deep into the rock , with multiple branches and cathedral like chambers . Perhaps the explosion of creativity we see on the walls of these caverns was inspired in part by their sheer depth and darkness or rather , the interplay of light and dark . Illuminated by the flickering light from fires or stone lamps burning animal grease , such as the lamps found in Lascaux , the bumps and crevices in the rock walls might suggest natural shapes , the way passing clouds can to an imaginative child . In Altamira , in northern Spain , the painters responsible for the famous bison incorporated the humps and bulges of the rock to give their images more life and dimension . Chauvet features a panel of four horse heads drawn over subtle curves and folds in a wall of receding rock , accentuating the animals snouts and foreheads . Their appearance changes according to your perspective : One view presents perfect profiles , but from another angle the horses noses and necks seem to strain , as if they are running away from you . In a different chamber a rendering of cave lions seems to emerge from a cut in the wall , accentuating the hunch in one animals back and shoulders as it stalks its unseen prey . As our guide put it , it is almost as if some animals were already in the rock , waiting to be revealed by the artists charcoal and paint . In his book La Prhistoire du Cinma , filmmaker and archaeologist Marc Azma argues that some of these ancient artists were the worlds first animators , and that the artists superimposed images combined with flickering firelight in the pitch black caves to create the illusion that the paintings were moving . They wanted to make these images lifelike , says Azma . He has re created digital versions of some cave images that illustrate the effect . The Lion Panel in Chauvets deepest chamber is a good example . It features the heads of ten lions , all seemingly intent on their prey . But in the light of a strategically positioned torch or stone lamp , these ten lions might be successive characterizations of just one lion , or perhaps two or three , moving through a story , much like the frames of a flip book or animated film . Beyond the lions stands a cluster of rhinoceroses . The head and horn of the top one are repeated staccato like six times , one image above the other , as if thrusting upward , its whole body shuddering with multiple outlines . Azmas interpretation fits with that of eminent prehistorian Jean Clottes the first scientist to enter Chauvet , only days after its discovery . Clottes believes the images in the cave were intended to be experienced much the way we view movies , theater , or even religious ceremonies today a departure from the real world that transfixed its audience and bound it in a powerful shared experience . It was a show ! says Clottes . Thousands of years later you can still feel the power of that show as you walk the chambers of the cave , the sound of your own breath heavy in your ear , the constant drip , drip of the water falling from the walls and ceilings . In its rhythm you can almost make out the thrum of ancient music , the beat of the dance , as a storyteller casts the light of a torch upon a floating image , and enthralls the audience with a tale . In the late 1980s , when the crack cocaine epidemic was ravaging Americas cities , Hallam Hurt , a neonatologist in Philadelphia , worried about the damage being done to children born to addicted mothers . She and her colleagues , studying children from low income families , compared four year olds whod been exposed to the drug with those who hadnt . They couldnt find any significant differences . Instead , what they discovered was that in both groups the childrens IQs were much lower than average . These little children were coming in cute as buttons , and yet their IQs were like 82 and 83 , Hurt says . Average IQ is 100 . It was shocking . The revelation prompted the researchers to turn their focus from what differentiated the two groups toward what they had in common : being raised in poverty . To understand the childrens environment , the researchers visited their homes with a checklist . They asked if the parents had at least ten books at home for the children , a record player with songs for them , and toys to help them learn numbers . They noted whether the parents spoke to the children in an affectionate voice , spent time answering their questions , and hugged , kissed , and praised them . The researchers found that children who received more attention and nurturing at home tended to have higher IQs . Children who were more cognitively stimulated performed better on language tasks , and those nurtured more warmly did better on memory tasks . Many years later , when the kids had entered their teens , the researchers took MRI images of their brains and then matched them up with the records of how warmly nurtured the children had been at both four and eight years old . They found a strong link between nurturing at age four and the size of the hippocampus a part of the brain associated with memory but found no correlation between nurturing at age eight and the hippocampus . The results demonstrated just how critically important an emotionally supportive environment is at a very young age . The Philadelphia study , published in 2010 , was one of the first to demonstrate that childhood experience shapes the structure of the developing brain . Since then , other studies have shown a link between a babys socioeconomic status and the growth of its brain . Despite coming prewired with mind boggling capacities , the brain depends heavily on environmental input to wire itself further . Scientists are now discovering precisely how that development is molded by the interplay between nature and nurture . Peering inside childrens brains with new imaging tools , scientists are untangling the mystery of how a child goes from being barely able to see when just born to being able to talk , ride a tricycle , draw , and invent an imaginary friend by the age of five . The more scientists find out about how children acquire the capacity for language , numbers , and emotional understanding during this period , the more they realize that the baby brain is an incredible learning machine . Its future to a great extent is in our hands . If the metamorphosis of a cluster of cells into a suckling baby is one of lifes great miracles , so is the transformation of that wobbly infant into a walking , talking toddler capable of negotiating bedtime . While researching this story , I have watched that miracle unfold before my eyes as my daughter has gone from a fidgety bundle with only a piercing cry signaling hunger to a feisty three year old who insists on putting on her sunglasses before stepping out of the house . The blossoming of her mental and emotional abilities has been a string of marvels , deepening my amazement at how deftly a babys brain comes to grasp the world . The milestones she has passed would be recognizable to any parent . At two she knew enough to realize that she didnt have to hold my hand when walking on the sidewalk ; she would reach for my hand only when we were about to cross the street . Around the same age , she also learned to block the drain in the bathtub with the ball of her foot turning what was to be a quick shower into a playful bath . Before she turned three , she was holding lengthy conversations and coming up with rhymes : If the candy tastes bad , Willy Wonka will be sad . Despite millennia of child rearing , we have only a limited understanding of how babies take such gigantic strides in cognitive , linguistic , reasoning , and planning ability . The lightning pace of development in these early years coincides with the formation of a vast skein of neural circuits . At birth the brain has nearly a hundred billion neurons , as many as in adulthood . As the baby grows , receiving a flood of sensory input , neurons get wired to other neurons , resulting in some hundred trillion connections by age three . Different stimuli and tasks , such as hearing a lullaby or reaching for a toy , help establish different neural networks . Circuits get strengthened through repeated activation . The sheath encasing nerve fibers made of an insulating material called myelin thickens along oft used pathways , helping electrical impulses travel more quickly . Idle circuits die through the severing of connections , known as synaptic pruning . Between the ages of one and five , and then again in early adolescence , the brain goes through cycles of growth and streamlining , with experience playing a key role in engraving the circuits that will endure . How nature and nurture combine to shape the brain is nowhere more evident than in the development of language ability . How much of that comes hardwired , and how do babies acquire the rest ? To learn how researchers are answering that question , I visit Judit Gervain , a cognitive neuroscientist at Paris Descartes University who has spent the past decade probing the linguistic acumen of children , ranging in age from days to a few years . We meet on the steps of Robert Debr Hospital in Paris , where Gervain is readying an experiment on newborns . I follow her into a room down the hall from the maternity ward . The mornings first subject is wheeled in on a cart , swaddled in a pink polka dot blanket , with dad in tow . A research assistant slips a skullcap studded with buttonlike sensors onto the infants head . The plan is to image the babys brain while playing a variety of audio sequences , like nu ja ga . But before any observations can begin , the baby emits a series of high pitched cries , making it known he isnt going to submit . The assistant hurriedly removes the cap , and the dad cradles the baby . After they leave , Gervain , who had just become a mother a few months earlier , tells me that such failures are not uncommon . Another newborn also accompanied by dad is wheeled in . Gervains assistant follows the same protocol , and this time the observing goes off without a hitch . The baby sleeps through it . Gervain and her colleagues have used a similar setup to test how good newborns are at discriminating between different sound patterns . Using near infrared spectroscopy , the researchers imaged the brains of babies while they heard audio sequences . In some , the sounds were repeated in an ABB structure , such as mu ba ba ; in others , an ABC structure , such as mu ba ge . The researchers found that brain regions responsible for speech and audio processing responded more strongly to the ABB sequences . In a later study they found that the newborn brain was also able to distinguish between audio sequences with an AAB pattern and those with an ABB pattern . Not only could babies discern repetition , they also were sensitive to where it occurred in the sequence . Gervain is excited by these findings because the order of sounds is the bedrock upon which words and grammar are built . Positional information is key to language , she says . If something is at the beginning or at the end makes a big difference : John killed the bear is very different from the bear killed John . That the baby brain responds from day one to the sequence in which sounds are arranged suggests that the algorithms for language learning are part of the neural fabric infants are born with . For a long time we had this linear view . First , babies are learning sounds , then they are understanding words , then many words together , Gervain says . But from recent results , we know that almost everything starts to develop from the get go . Babies are starting to learn grammatical rules from the beginning . Researchers led by Angela Friederici , a neuropsychologist at the Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences in Leipzig , Germany , have found evidence of such comprehension in an experiment with four month old German babies exposed to an unfamiliar language . The children first heard a series of Italian sentences representing two types of construction : The brother can sing and The sister is singing . After three minutes they listened to another set of Italian sentences , some of which were grammatically incorrect , along the lines of The brother is sing and The sister can singing . During this phase the researchers measured the infants brain activity using tiny electrodes placed on the scalp . In the first round of testing the babies showed a similar brain response to both correct and incorrect sentences . A few rounds of training later , the infants exhibited very different activation patterns when they heard erroneous constructions . In just 15 minutes the babies appeared to have absorbed what was correct . Somehow they must have learned it , despite not comprehending the meaning of the sentences , Friederici tells me . At this point its not syntax . Its phonologically encoded regularity . Researchers have shown that children around two and a half years old are savvy enough to correct grammatical mistakes made by puppets . By the age of three most children seem to master a considerable number of grammatical rules . Their vocabulary burgeons . This flowering of language ability comes about as new connections are made among neurons , so that speech can be processed on multiple levels : sound , meaning , and syntax . Scientists have yet to unveil the precise map followed by the infant brain on the path to linguistic fluency . But whats clear , in the words of Friederici , is this : The equipment alone is not enough . You also need input . On my way to Leipzig to interview Friederici , my attention is drawn to a mother and her young son , engaging in conversation on a shuttle bus at the Munich airport . What do you see in the distance ? the mother asks as the bus takes us from the terminal to the aircraft . I see a lot of planes ! the kid exults , bouncing . Seated in a row ahead of me on the flight , the two keep up an unflaggingly spirited exchange . The woman stops to answer the boys every question as she reads him one picture book after another , drawing on what seems like a limitless reservoir of enthusiasm . When we land , I learn that the mom , Merle Fairhurst , is a cognitive neuroscientist who studies child development and social cognition . It isnt surprising that she is determined to apply the emerging research on how stimulation can help the developing brain . More than two decades ago Todd Risley and Betty Hart , both child psychologists then at the University of Kansas in Lawrence , recorded hundreds of hours of interactions between children and adults in 42 families from across the socioeconomic spectrum , following the kids from the age of nine months to three years . Studying the transcripts of these recordings , Risley and Hart made a surprising discovery . Children in well off families where the parents were typically college educated professionals heard an average of 2 ,153 words an hour spoken to them , whereas children in families on welfare heard an average of 616 words . By the age of four this difference translated to a cumulative gap of some 30 million words . Parents in poorer homes tended to make shorter , more perfunctory comments , like Stop that , and Get down , whereas parents in wealthier homes had extended conversations with their kids about a variety of topics , encouraging them to use their memory and imagination . The kids in low socioeconomic families were being raised on a poor linguistic diet .
The amount of talking parents did with their children made a big difference , the researchers found . The kids who were spoken to more got higher scores on IQ tests at age three . They also performed better in school at ages nine and ten . Exposing children to more words would seem simple enough . But language delivered by television , audio book , Internet , or smartphone no matter how educational doesnt appear to do the job . Thats what researchers led by Patricia Kuhl , a neuroscientist at the University of Washington in Seattle , learned from a study of nine month old children . Kuhl and her colleagues were exploring a key puzzle of language acquisition : how babies home in on the phonetic sounds of their native language by the age of one . In the first few months of their lives , babies show a knack for discriminating between sounds in any language , native or foreign . Between six and 12 months of age , however , they start losing the ability to make such distinctions in a foreign language , while getting better at discriminating between native language sounds . Japanese children , for example , are no longer able to distinguish between l and r sounds . In their study the researchers exposed nine month olds from English speaking families to Mandarin . Some of the children interacted with native Chinese speaking tutors , who played with them and read to them . The babies were entranced by these tutors , Kuhl says . In the waiting room they would watch the door for their tutors to come in . Another group of children saw and heard the same Mandarin speaking tutors through a video presentation . And a third group heard only the audio track . After all the children had been through 12 sessions , they were tested on their ability to discriminate between similar phonetic sounds in Mandarin . The researchers expected the children whod watched the videos to show the same kind of learning as the kids tutored face to face . Instead they found a huge difference . The children exposed to the language through human interactions were able to discriminate between similar Mandarin sounds as well as native listeners . But the other infants regardless of whether they had watched the video or listened to the audio showed no learning whatsoever . We were blown away , Kuhl says . It changed our fundamental thinking about the brain . The result of this and other studies led Kuhl to propose what she calls the social gating hypothesis : the idea that social experience is a portal to linguistic , cognitive , and emotional development . After gaining power in Romania in the mid 1960s , the communist leader Nicolae Ceausescu implemented drastic measures to transform the country from an agricultural society into an industrial one . To increase the population , the regime limited contraception and abortion , and imposed a tax on couples older than 25 who were childless . Thousands of families moved from villages to cities to take jobs at government factories . These policies led many parents to abandon their newborn children , who were then placed in a state run institution called a leagan : the Romanian word for cradle . It was only after Ceausescu was deposed in 1989 that the outside world saw the horrific conditions in which these children were living . As babies , they were left in cribs for hours . Typically their only human contact was when a caregiver each responsible for 15 to 20 children came to feed or bathe them . As toddlers , they hardly received any attention . The system of institutionalized care was slow to change , and in 2001 , US researchers began a study of 136 children from six institutions to investigate the impact of neglect on their development . The researchers led by Charles Zeanah , a child psychiatrist at Tulane University ; Nathan Fox , a developmental psychologist and neuroscientist at the University of Maryland ; and Charles Nelson , a neuroscientist at Harvard were struck by the childrens aberrant behaviors . Many of the kids , less than two years old when the study began , showed no attachment to their caregivers . When upset , they wouldnt go to the caregivers . Instead , they showed these almost feral behaviors that we had never seen before : aimlessly wandering around , hitting their heads against the floor , twirling and freezing in one place , Fox says . When the researchers conducted an EEG test of the childrens brains , they found that these signals were weaker than the signals recorded from similarly aged children in the general population . It was as if a dimmer switch had been used to turn their brain activity down , Fox says . He and his colleagues then placed half of the kids with foster families that they picked with the help of social workers . The remaining kids stayed at the institutions . The foster families received a monthly stipend , books , toys , diapers and other supplies , as well as periodic visits by the social workers . Fox and his colleagues followed the children over the next several years and saw dramatic differences emerge between the groups . At age eight the children placed with foster families at age two or earlier showed EEG brain patterns that were indistinguishable from those of typical eight year olds . The kids who had remained at the institutions continued to have weaker EEGs . Although all the children in the study had smaller brain volumes than similarly aged kids in the general population , the ones who received foster care had more white matter axons connecting neurons than the institutionalized kids . It suggests that there were more neuronal connections made in the children who experienced the intervention , Fox explains . The most striking difference between the two sets of children , evident by the age of four , was in their social abilities . We find that many of the children who were put into our intervention , particularly the children who were taken out of institutions early , could now relate to their caregiver in the way that a typical child would , Fox says . Theres enough plasticity in the brain early in life that allows children to overcome negative experiences . And that , Fox says , is the best news : Some of the debilitating effects of early deprivation can be addressed with appropriate nurturing , as long as it is provided within a critical period of development . A parental training program led by neuroscientist Helen Neville at the University of Oregon in Eugene aims to do just that . The researchers sign up participants from among families enrolled in Head Start , a US government program that gives a leg up to preschoolers from low income families . Parents or care providers come in for a class every week over a two month period . In the first few classes they get tips on lowering the stress involved in the day to day care of children . As any parent can testify , these stresses can at times be overwhelming to even the most Zen like among us , and they can feel even more burdensome to parents dealing with financial worries . You find yourself on edge because you dont have certain things , says Patricia Kycek , a Eugene mom whos taken the classes . Parents learn to emphasize positive reinforcement , expressing praise for specific accomplishments . We encourage them to shift the focus from scolding your child every time they are doing something wrong to noticing every time they are doing something right , explains Sarah Burlingame , a former parent instructor . In later weeks parents learn how to stimulate the child . In one activity that they are encouraged to try at home , the parent asks the child to pick out various objects a spoon , a bottle , a pen and guess which will float and which will sink . Then the child gets to test each prediction in a bucket of water or in the bathtub . The children receive training in attention and self control in a 40 minute session every week . They work on focusing on a task in the midst of distractions for instance , coloring inside the lines of figures while other kids bounce balloons all around . Instructors also teach them to better identify their emotions through a game called Emotional Bingo , in which children match states like happy and sad with facial expressions . In some later classes the kids learn to practice calming techniques , like taking a deep breath when they are upset . At the end of the eight weeks the researchers evaluate the kids on language , nonverbal IQ , and attention . Through a questionnaire given to the parents , they also assess how the kids are doing behaviorally . In a paper published in July 2013 , Neville and her colleagues reported that kids in Head Start who received the intervention showed significantly higher increases on these measures than those who did not . Parents reported experiencing much lower stress in managing their children . When you change parenting and stress level goes down , that leads to increased emotional regulation and better cognition for the kids , Neville says . Tana Argo , a young mother of four , decided to go through the program to make sure she wouldnt subject her children to the kind of neglect that she had suffered as a child . I grew up with a lot of stress and drama , she says . I told myself , Im going to remember this with my kids . This wont happen to my kids . What she learned she says has altered the familys dynamic , creating more time for play and learning . When I visit her at home one afternoon , she describes how happy she felt a few days earlier when she saw her four year old daughter the youngest plop down on the carpet to thumb through a childrens encyclopedia . As Im leaving , I notice the encyclopedia resting on top of a stack of books , most of them for children . In the best of circumstances , that stack would perhaps serve as a wall against the generational dominoes of poverty and neglect , helping Argos kids build a future that she never had a shot at . When he was 15 years old , David Adeoti worked in an Internet caf in blue collar Satellite Town , where it was almost possible to see the gleaming towers of Lagos Island less than ten miles to the east . Satellite Town was a step up for Adeoti . His birthplace was off to the north in Orile , a wretched village of flooded streets and collapsing buildings . Technology had provided his way out . The Internet caf in Satellite Town was run as a side business by a banker , who saw that the boy had a natural facility for computers even the shops ancient desktops , which operated at lurching speeds . The banker paid Adeoti a little more than $200 a month to run the place . Adeoti spent his money on courses at a technical institute , determined that the Internet caf would not be the end of the line for him . One day in 2010 the shops customers looked up from the computers to see who had just walked in the door with the mannered British accent . His name was Jason Njoku , a bespectacled 30 year old Londoner who had relocated to his ancestral homeland of Nigeria . Njoku asked Adeoti if he could scan some documents . While Adeoti operated the scanner , the genteel visitor mentioned that he was trying to find investors for a new business venture and asked the Internet caf manager if he enjoyed his job . They exchanged cell phone numbers . A few months later Adeoti inquired about a job and was invited to Njokus apartment . Adeoti walked inside to find six young men wedged behind desks with computer cables snaked around their feet as they typed . This , Njoku informed Adeoti , was his new business : an indigenous version of Netflix that would stream movies to Nigerian computers and bring Nigerian movies to the world . Njoku needed someone like Adeoti to convert Nollywood DVDs into a YouTube format . As was evident by the cramped environs , the project was perilously low on money . Adeoti signed on anyway , thinking , Its going to sell itself . When I met David Adeoti in spring 2014 , he was 24 and wearing an elegant knit shirt and designer jeans while sitting behind a Mac laptop in the sleek three story office that now houses iROKOtv in Lagos . Njokus company has about 80 employees , with additional offices in Johannesburg , London , and New York City . Adeoti makes twice the salary he made as the manager at the Internet caf . But all this exposure to money and movies had whetted his appetite for more of both . I plan on starting my own business something in the film industry , he told me . He was saving money to travel to Hollywood . He wants to be a cinematographer and perhaps one day , a Nollywood studio executive . Its a very far distance from middle class to being rich , Adeoti said . With a widening grin , he added , But the middle class , we strive . Everyone is very desperate to be very rich these days . Almost anywhere else in the developing world , such a sentiment would seem pitiably delusional . In Lagos , Nigerias commercial center , Be Very Rich has all but become the citys motto . The country recently recalculated its gross domestic product to take into account sectors of the economy that barely existed two decades ago . As a result , Nigeria determined that its GDP surpassed South Africas in 2012 to become the continents largest economy . About 15 ,700 millionaires and a handful of billionaires live in Nigeria , more than 60 percent of them in Lagos . As with other African metropolises , oil enriched Lagos has long nurtured an elite class only marginally inconvenienced by the squalor enveloping the city as a whole . Now the upper class is expanding , and despite persistent income inequality , so is the middle class . The growth of the latter in Nigeria , according to a 2013 survey by Ciuci Consulting , a strategy and marketing firm in Lagos , is driven by the expanding banking , telecommunications , and services sectors , particularly in Lagos . Nigerias middle class grew from 480000 in 1990 to 4 .1 million in 2014 , or 11 percent of households . Seemingly overnight , Lagos has transformed itself into a city of Davids clamoring to become Goliaths . This is a great African success story . And how lovely it would be to tell this bright , uplifting tale while ignoring altogether the dark and demoralizing saga of Nigerias grotesque terrorists , which has blocked the boomtown narrative from the worlds consciousness like a lunar eclipse . But Lagos does not exist in a parallel universe , any more than the Islamic extremist group Boko Haram does . Both are indigenous to Nigeria , a vast West African nation teeming with industrious strivers like Adeoti but also with poverty , despair , and violence . If anything , the miracle of Lagos is that its economy gallops onward even when fettered by the same federal incompetence that allows terrorism to go unchecked . A lesser city would be crippled . Then again , in a sense so is Lagos . Nigerias problem and Lagoss problem is its image . Thats the chief problem . Youd think you were in a war zone in Afghanistan when you read what you read about here ! But tell me : Have you felt any threat ? No , I confessed to Kola Karim , the dashing 45 year old multimillionaire and CEO of Shoreline Energy International , a food/energy/telecommunications/construction conglomerate with more than 3000 employees . I felt quite safe in Lagos a pleasant surprise , given that I had boarded my flight to the city on the same day that dozens were killed in a bomb blast at a bus depot in the capital city of Abuja . It was the latest in a string of terrorist episodes for which Boko Haram had taken credit . But Lagos had been spared from such incidents , so far . The violence felt a country away like a bad dream washed from memory after a mornings shower . Look , I was invited to the White House a few weeks ago , Karim went on , his British educated diction edged with exasperation . There were 21 of us , young global leaders of the World Economic Forum . I told them , Youre always viewing things from a national security angle rather than commercial viability . You invite African businessmen over , and all you want to know about is al Qaeda . Why are you wasting my time to come all the way here to listen to the same old gibberish ? Karim makes it his business to evangelize about the Lagos miracle in which he has played a notable role . Later in the day a French TV station would be filming Karim playing polo as a way of showcasing the citys prosperity . The following week he would be at the Milken Institute in Santa Monica , giving a speech about Africas power sector . Karim has delivered similar talks at Harvard and Yale , part of what he refers to as his moral duty to promote Nigeria and Lagos . When I joked that he could be making big money on the speaking circuit , the Lagos entrepreneur solemnly replied , I will start charging money when the world has heard our story . Here is the story , in brief . Following centuries of tribal rule by territorial kings and emperors and 99 years of British colonial rule , Nigeria achieved independence in 1960 and was intermittently ruled by military heads of state until 1999 , when it at last achieved a rickety state of democracy . Among its 36 states , Lagos which includes the sprawling port city of the same name was ever the countrys center of power , even when the federal capital was relocated in 1991 to Abuja , a 450 mile drive away . Still , Lagos deteriorated under decades of military rule . Its schools , roads , and hospitals went to seed . Western investors kept their distance . When Karim returned from England to his birthplace in 1996 to build on the family cocoa business , there were very few of his kind , because , he told me , it wasnt an open economy , and financial services were few . Back then the total capital of a bank was maybe two million dollars . Imagine you want to do business in Lagos . How much can a bank like that possibly lend you ? Fast forward to today theyll lend you up to $500 million ! What happened to Lagos stemmed from a convergence of two phenomena . First , after knowing only political incompetence , the newly democratized Lagosians elected a pair of remarkably consequential state governors : former accountant Bola Tinubu in 1999 , and in 2007 his handpicked successor , Babatunde Fashola , who has been credited with helping quash an Ebola outbreak in Lagos . The two executives restored some fiscal sanity to Lagos while investing in bridges and expressways . Meanwhile a reverse diaspora transpired as native Nigerians began to return home . When the worldwide recession foreclosed opportunity in Europe and America , Lagos offered itself as a new frontier for ambitious entrepreneurs . One of them , Lanre Akinlagun , told me , Back in the UK , all of my friends started moving back to Lagos . When theyd return to visit , wed meet in a bar , and theyd buy a round of shots . But then later theyd come back and order up bottles of the most expensive stuff . I told myself , OK , somethings going on here . On the Atlantic coast and consisting of a slab of mainland around a lagoon and several islands , Lagos today is an ad hoc ecosystem thrashing with wealth seekers . Tourism is largely absent here one comes to Lagos strictly to do business and yet at the same time it is a strangely inviting place , a city of optimists . That is not to suggest that life in Lagos is a smooth ride . As with all boomtowns , the city is at pains to keep up with itself . Lagoss population is growing so fast and is so transient that its impossible to estimate the number of inhabitants more precisely than between 13 million and 18 million . The hubs of commerce are the two small islands of Lagos and Victoria , and only the very wealthy can afford to live there . While developers swoop down on every last sliver of marshland , forest , and landfill ( and in the case of the ultra elite planned city of Eko Atlantic , 3 .5 square miles of land recovered from the ocean ) , ambitious Lagosians struggle to reconcile their status consciousness with the absurd price of central housing and the 20 percent interest that banks commonly charge for mortgage loans . Invariably , Lagosians settle on a flat somewhere on the mainland , which means enduring commutes through grinding traffic that can exceed two hours each way . Or it means waiting out the gridlock over beers and cigars with fellow young Turks at a bar somewhere on the islands a fraternal spectacle as endemic to Lagos as the traffic snarls themselves . I sat one late afternoon in one of those bars with a half dozen well dressed bankers in their 30s , a daily congregation of gentlemen who have perfected the art of boozy time wasting . One of them , an especially talkative fellow , told me that a flat on the island would cost four times the amount he had paid for his house on the mainland . If I had the right kind of income , of course Id live on the island , he said . If I lived on the island , Id go home , check my boys homework assignments , play some computer games with them , maybe take my wife out for dinner . During the week I cant do that . The young banker then laughed off his predicament and called out for another round . A recent survey of middle class Nigerians conducted by Renaissance Capital , an investment bank , found that 76 percent of them are optimistic about the countrys future . Sunniness of outlook has deep roots in Nigeria , particularly so in Lagos , a land of traders and settlers , and thus of industrious disposition . Lagosians believe themselves to be pluckier than the average West African . This is , if anything , a modest self assessment . The man I hired to drive me around during my three weeks in Lagos , Daniel Sunday , took me one day to the neighborhood where he was born and raised : Makoko , a fetid shantytown on stilts in Lagos Lagoon that is mordantly referred to as the Venice of Africa . Sunday told me that he left the shabby family home when he was a teenager and found work as a bus conductor . He slept on his bosss floor and after a few years had accumulated enough money to buy his first car . Now he was married , with a residence on the mainland , and for two hours each morning he uncomplainingly chauffeured customers like me around the commercial districts . The motto on Sundays business card was In God I Trust . If you give a Nigerian an opportunity , he will do his best , a 36 year old man named Onyekachi Chiagozie proclaimed one hot afternoon as he proudly showed me his mobile electricians workshop . In truth , the hollowed out van with the cracked windshield wasnt much to look at . Chiagozie had bought the used van for about $4 ,300 , and with it he could drive his tools all over the city , an enabler and beneficiary of Lagoss construction boom . All of this was an improbable outcome for a young man who , at 18 , became an unpaid apprentice to an electrician and worked odd jobs to survive . For a time he slept in a bus stop . He owned what he was wearing and nothing else . After about four years Chiagozie scraped together enough money to rent a tiny house in the mixed income neighborhood of Ojota , where he had apprenticed . Save , save , save : Ive made the sacrifice , and its started to pay off , he recalled . I registered my company . People in the area knew me . Id fix this socket or see why that light wasnt turning on . The customers grew to trust me . Then they started getting me good jobs . Wiring whole houses . Fixing ATMs and air conditioners . And because in Lagos its very expensive to have an office , I decided to have the first mobile workshop in the country . The owner of the whimsically named Varied Pace Enterprises , Chiagozie beamed as he told me that he was now married , with a three bedroom house in Ojota and a tract of land outside the city that he deemed a prudent investment . He shepherded me through the neighborhood , pointing out the houses that he and his two apprentices were currently wiring . The slum child had broken through . Another Lagos success story but an unfinished one , for this was not nearly enough . Ive been making money , the electrician told me , but the money is better across the bridge , on the island . And I dont know the right people there yet . Banke Meshida Lawal knows the right people . When I visited her at her beauty salon , BM Pro , on Lagos Island , the young makeup artist was applying a full makeover to a wealthy client who would soon be attending a wedding in Chicago . Because Lawal herself could not break away from her business to fly over for the event , a colleague was videotaping the procedure , and a copy would be sent to one of Lawals beauty reps in the United States , who would replicate the makeover on the wedding day . Lawals onetime fee was more than what it had cost Chiagozie to buy his mobile electricians workshop . The makeup artist shares with the electrician a fierce entrepreneurial motor , though she began with a leg up on the ladder . Lawals father was a university lecturer , her mother a radiologist . While studying English at the University of Lagos , she began doing other students makeup for a small fee . There was nothing like makeup artistry back then it was unheard of , she told me . But when I was traveling to the UK on holiday , Id buy all sorts of makeup , and I was addicted to the girlie teenage magazines like Marie Claire and Cosmo . My background was in fine arts , and that helped me to put together colors and draw lines . During her postcollegiate year of youth service mandated by the Nigerian government , Lawal decided to open a little cubicle in the affluent neighborhood of Ikoyi . In 2000 she did the makeup for the women in the wedding of the new presidents son . Press coverage followed . She moved to a larger studio . More celebrities requested her services , which now included hair and nails . Today BM Pro has four branches and 32 employees . Banke Meshida Lawal has what Onyekachi Chiagozie wants . She occupies the dead center of island prosperity . I know that what I do is ostentatious . Its luxury , Lawal told me . Anyone can get by doing their own makeup themselves . But if they want that something special make it go pow , give it that extra thing they come to me . This is a cash economy , and there are people here willing to pay the cash . Smiling somewhat ruefully , the makeup artist added , The gap is so great between rich and poor . Im just glad to be on the receiving end of the cash . On a sunny Easter morning I climbed aboard a motorboat docked at Victoria Island and rode an hour along the coast outside of Lagos until the driver deposited me at the edge of a dirt trail that led to a beach house crammed with 200 dancing , cognac swilling young Lagosians . Everyone was dressed entirely in white , as instructed by the party invitation at least until a hard rain pummeled the patio , at which point many stripped down to their swimsuits and jumped in the pool . They all seemed to know one another from the same nightclubs , or the same business deals , or the same university back in London , or Lawals beauty salon . Few if any of them likely fraternized with aspiring laborers like Chiagozie or knew the hard path he had taken to the middle class . I stood beside the hip hop deejay for several hours , observing this landscape of impervious beauty and affluence a tableau that could just as easily be taking place halfway around the globe , in the Hollywood Hills or the Hamptons . Where it could not be taking place , I found myself thinking , was more than 700 miles northeast , in the forests of northern Nigeria , where roughly the same number of individuals young schoolgirls were being held hostage after Boko Haram had kidnapped them six days earlier . The moneyed and the maraudered . Within a few days the New York Times T Magazine would publish a lavish spread in celebration of the former ( In Lagos , the 1% Takes Stock ) even as #bringbackourgirls hashtag activism sounded alarms on behalf of the latter . How do the two worlds coexist ? How does Lagos prosper when upper Nigeria roils with chaos ? It takes effort to discern any connection . But after a couple of weeks moving through the city , I began to form questions : If Nigeria is the largest exporter of petroleum in Africa , how can there be continual fuel scarcity , such that Lagosians periodically sit in gas lines for up to four hours ? Why does every building in the city not just the low income hovels on the mainland but also the sleekest hotels on Lagos Island rely on generators to supply round the clock power ? Why do residents continue to pay for electricity that never arrives ? Why do the citys police set up evening checkpoints on the bridges and shake down commuters for cash ? Why do the top academics at the University of Lagos carry on with strikes lasting entire semesters ? Whats wrong with this picture ? Corruption is whats wrong and because much of it exists on the federal level , Lagos is largely powerless to overcome it . The striking professors and the underpaid police are federal employees . That petro titan Nigeria must import fuel to attempt to meet consumer demand is the result of the petroleum ministry sitting helplessly by while the countrys refineries deteriorate and gas marketers hold back production to jack up prices . And the chronic power outages throughout the city are also the fault of the bureaucrats in Abuja , according to Abike Dabiri Erewa , who serves in the Nigerian House of Representatives . And theyre not tapping the gas thats there . So the problem is that the plants arent being powered , the Lagos representative told me . Dabiri Erewa was once a TV reporter . As a federal lawmaker , she witnesses firsthand the kind of wanton corruption that the government owned Nigerian Television Authority would never have allowed her to cover . It is a real phenomenon , she said somberly . And its done with impunity . Someone working in the government owns a private jet . A civil servant steals a billion naira [six million dollars] in pension funds , and hes walking about freely . Not one federal official has been punished for corruption not one ! Here in Lagos theres lots of everyday ingenuity . You see people surviving by selling oranges or phone cards . Still , all of this corruption has to be demoralizing for the average Nigerian . It does more than demoralize : The unscrupulousness comes at the expense of hardworking Lagosians unless , of course , theyre willing and able to play the game . Chiagozie told me that bureaucratic corruption routinely affected his livelihood . Most electricians like me are seeking a job with contractors , he said . But some of them arent engineers . Theyre teachers , or something else , and they just happen to have a brother who works in the government . So when a contract comes their way , they hire a subcontractor . And the subcontractor is able to pocket a lot of money by using inferior materials . And they wont hire me , because I insist on using the best material . If I were to use inferior material , the building might collapse , and then the government would arrest me and take my license away and make me pay for the damage . This happens all the time . When I asked Kola Karim if the federal governments sorry reputation made Western investors wary of doing business in Lagos , the worldly CEO elaborately dismissed it as a nonissue . Companies partnered with companies , not with bureaucrats , he maintained . What does government do for you anyway , apart from charging you more taxes ? he said . Look , its not about who rules anymore . Lagos is a train that has left the station . And you can only slow it down you cant stop it . So it doesnt matter who comes next . This is the fun of democracy ! Its not about [President] Goodluck Jonathan ! Its about progress ! Forget politics ! I left the offices of Shoreline pondering these words of Karim , a genuine patriot who generously donates time and money to Nigerian causes . Its difficult to begrudge him his yellow Ferrari and his vacation homes in Miami and Marbella , on Spains Mediterranean coast , and the fact that his children , who live in London , stand little chance of being kidnapped by Boko Haram . Still , Karim said it himself : Lagos may never be stopped , but it can be slowed . It is not immune to the forces paralyzing less fortunate regions of Nigeria . And when I observed to Dabiri Erewa that Boko Harams attacks had spared Lagos , she waved her hand frantically and shook her head . This was not , after all , a far flung terrorist outfit targeted by American drone missiles . Boko Haram was born in Nigeria and is devastatingly effective . As were speaking now , we dont know where theyre going to strike next , she said . And while theyre planning , the federal government seems to have no clue . The city remains , for now , safe and a home for the bold , where even those who could be forgiven for despairing are instead eyeing the next rung on Lagoss golden ladder . I was told about a hustling fellow named T . J . who apparently had a knack for acquiring how , it wasnt entirely clear a reliable inventory of fashionable used clothes , which he sold in a grubby stall on Market Street , within walking distance of the Nigerian Stock Exchange . The lanky entrepreneur greeted me , sized me up , and then proceeded to pull out several plastic garbage bags filled with mens shirts . Even when I was small , I believed there was something behind me , driving me , TJ said as he riffled through the shirts to find something appropriate for me . Im an incurable optimist . I dont believe in negativity . My customers , they love this about me . I cannot call myself a pastor , but I speak the truth . And the truth is , I love this country . People here are suffering . Im suffering . And the government , they wont do the right thing . But its all about attitude . I can feed myself . And one day Ill do something else . Still digging in his bag of used clothes , the salesman said , Right now Im just trying to find the leverage .
Around the village of Unalaska and nearby Dutch Harbor , the largest fishing port in the United States , the eagles are very much used to people . Fish are everywhere , and the eagles hang around , looking for leftovers . They go to fishing boats , where they search on the decks after the boats come in . They go to where the fishermen clean their nets . They sit on the roofs of processing plants . To make these photographs , I would go to the wild places outside of town where these habituated eagles congregated . There I could face the eagles eye to eye . I could get close to them without using a blind . They were always fully aware of me . I had to be careful , I had to study them , and I had to know what they liked and what they didnt like . You might have found me lying on my belly , surrounded by 40 eagles . I have been to the Aleutians seven times , and I will go again . I am an eagle man I like eagles so much . You see , they can fly , and I cannot . It used to be said that cosmologists , the scientists who study the universe as a whole , are often in error but never in doubt . Nowadays theyre less often in error , but their doubts have grown as big as all outdoors . After decades of research involving new and better telescopes , light detectors , and computers , cosmologists can now state with some assurance that the universe was born 13 billion , 820 million years ago , most likely as a bubble of space smaller than an atom . For the first time theyve mapped the cosmic background radiation light released when the universe was only 378000 years old to an accuracy of better than a tenth of one percent . But they have also concluded that all the stars and galaxies they see in the sky make up only 5 percent of the observable universe . The invisible majority consists of 27 percent dark matter and 68 percent dark energy . Both of them are mysteries . Dark matter is thought to be responsible for sculpting the glowing sheets and tendrils of galaxies that make up the large scale structure of the universe yet nobody knows what it is . Dark energy is even more mysterious ; the term , coined to denote whatever is accelerating the rate at which the cosmos expands , has been called a general label for what we do not know about the large scale properties of our universe . As a result , cosmologists today find themselves in something like the ignorance that afflicted Thomas Jefferson in 1804 , when he enjoined Lewis and Clark to keep an eye out for woolly mammoths . Jefferson and his contemporaries knew that North America from the Mississippi River to the Pacific Ocean was big and important , but they had only vague notions of what might live there . The first inkling of dark matters pervasive presence came in the 1930s from the Swiss astronomer Fritz Zwicky . While working at the Mount Wilson Observatory in southern California , Zwicky measured the speeds at which galaxies in the Coma cluster , 321 million light years from Earth , orbit the center of the cluster . He calculated that unless the cluster contained much more mass than was visible , the galaxies would long since have flown off into space . That the Coma cluster had survived for billions of years could only mean , he surmised , that dark matter is present in the universe in far greater density than visible matter . Subsequent investigations have indicated that galaxies never would have formed in the first place had not the gravity generated by dark matter gathered primordial materials together when the universe was young . Dark matter cant just be inconspicuous normal matter , because there isnt enough of that . Trillions of dim , normal matter objects surely are out there among them black holes , dwarf stars , cold gas clouds , and rogue planets ejected from their birthplaces but in no plausible scenario do they add up to five times the mass of the bright stuff . Hence scientists think that dark matter must be made of more exotic materials . Theorists working in whats called supersymmetric quantum physics have conjured up lots of unobserved varieties of matter , one or more of which might turn out to be dark matter . But recent experimental results obtained with CERNs Large Hadron Collider , near Geneva , Switzerland , ruled out some versions of supersymmetry . The mood among the theorists , says one of them , is fairly somber . Rather than speculate about the precise identity of dark matter , most scientists on the hunt just say theyre looking for WIMPs , or weakly interacting massive particles . Evidence of just how weakly dark matter interacts not just with normal matter but also with itself has turned up three billion light years from Earth , in the Bullet cluster which is actually two galaxy clusters in the act of colliding . Astronomers mapping the Bullet with the aid of NASAs Chandra X ray Observatory found massive clumps of hot gas at its center , which they attributed to collisions of clouds of normal matter . But when the astronomers charted the Bullets gravitational field , they discovered two more huge concentrations of mass , one for each of the original clusters , farther from the center of the collision . They concluded that although the normal matter frames of the two clusters were colliding and merging as spectacularly as two munitions trains , their heavier cargoes of dark matter were sailing through the carnage uninvolved and unscathed . Dark matters aloofness makes it challenging for experimenters to catch even if , as some scientists estimate , dark matter particles are so commonplace that billions of them pass through every human being every second . The dark matter detectors currently operating are so technologically sophisticated as to resemble Faberg eggs constructed for the delectation of future archaeologists . One of them , the two billion dollar Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer , is perched on the International Space Station and hunts for evidence of dark matter particles colliding near the center of our galaxy . Most of the detectors , however , look for interactions between particles of dark matter and normal matter here on Earth . Theyre buried deep underground , to minimize intrusions by high velocity normal matter particles flying in from space . Some consist of a supercooled set of crystals or a tank of liquid xenon or argon surrounded by detectors and onionskin layers of shielding materials , ranging from polyethylene to copper to lead . ( Recently mined lead tends to be mildly radioactive , so two experiments one in Soudan , Minnesota , and the other in LAquila , Italy use the melted down ballast of ancient Roman shipwrecks . Mined thousands of years ago , the old lead emits less radioactivity . ) Americas Large Underground Xenon detector , the most sensitive of its kind , is situated in Lead , South Dakota , right off Main Street and 4 ,850 feet down by elevator . It started operating in 2013 but came up empty handed ; its currently resuming the search at a higher sensitivity . Other searches produced ghostly clues , but none has found definitive evidence of dark matter . The Large Hadron Collider , scheduled to resume operations in 2015 after a shutdown for maintenance and upgrades , may attain high enough energy levels to produce a few dark matter particles . But the odds are difficult to estimate , because the masses of the sought after particles are not well understood . WIMP hunting is not for wimps . Weird as the dark matter riddle may be , it looks almost pedestrian in comparison with the mysterious phenomenon of dark energy , which physicist Steven Weinberg calls the central problem for physics and astrophysicist Michael Turner nominates as the most profound mystery in all of science . Turner coined the term dark energy after two teams of astronomers announced in 1998 that the rate at which the universe was expanding appeared to be accelerating . The astronomers reached this conclusion by studying a particular class of exploding stars that are bright enough to be seen far away and consistent enough in brightness to make them useful in charting the distances of remote galaxies . The mutual tug of gravity among all galaxies serves as a brake on the expansion of the universe , and so astronomers expected it to be slowing down . Instead they found just the opposite : The universe is expanding ever faster as time goes by and has been doing so for the past five to six billion years . Observers today are busily mapping the universe with unprecedented precision , looking for evidence of just when dark energy emerged and whether it has since remained constant in strength or is growing even stronger . They have the advantage of being able to peer into the past : When researchers study a galaxy billions of light years from Earth , they see it as it looked billions of years ago . They are limited , though , by the capacity of their telescopes and digital detectors . Now , as in the past , writing more accurate cosmological history requires building better gear . That call is being answered by projects such as the Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey , which employs a 2 .5 meter telescope at Apache Point in New Mexico to map cosmic distances at an unprecedented one percent accuracy . Meanwhile the Dark Energy Survey , using the Blanco four meter telescope in the Chilean Andes , is collecting data on 300 million galaxies . The European Space Agencys Euclid space telescope , scheduled for launch in 2020 , is designed to make precise measurements of cosmic dynamics over the past ten billion years . Expectations run high as well for the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope ( LSST ) , currently under construction in north central Chile , a few miles from the Blanco telescope . A squat , photographically fast 8 .4 meter instrument equipped with the largest digital camera ever made , the LSST is designed to repeatedly image the depths of the observable universe , covering the southern night sky up to ten times each month . With such tools , cosmologists hope to reconstruct the history of dark energys emergence and influence by directly measuring the cosmic expansion rate throughout the past . At issue may be nothing less than the future of the universe and of its study . If we live in a runaway universe increasingly dominated by dark energy , most galaxies eventually will be driven beyond one anothers sight , leaving far future cosmologists with little to observe but their immediate neighborhood and the blackness of space . In the nearer future , making sense of dark energy may require radical improvements in the way we conceive of space itself . The voids between the planets and stars were long thought to be sheer nothingness , although Isaac Newton admitted that he couldnt imagine how gravity could keep the Earth spinning around the sun if the space between them was utterly vacuous . In the 20th century , quantum field theory came to the rescue by demonstrating that space is never really empty but instead is suffused with quantum fields , which are literally everywhere . The protons , electrons , and other particles often described as the building blocks of matter are themselves excitations of quantum fields . Space looks empty when the fields languish near their minimum energy levels . But when the fields are excited , space comes alive with visible matter and energy . The mathematician Luciano Boi compares space to the water in a quiet Alpine pond : invisible when calm but evident when a breeze ripples its surface . Empty space is not empty , the American physicist John Archibald Wheeler once said . It is the seat of the most rich and surprising physics . Dark energy may prove him to have been prophetic on the largest possible scale . To understand how cosmic space balloons and why it now seems to be ballooning ever faster physicists rely mainly on Einsteins general theory of relativity , composed a century ago . That theory works well on the large scale but bows out at the microscopic level , where quantum theory reigns and the underlying cause of accelerating cosmic expansion is thought to reside . Explaining dark energy may require something new : a quantum theory of space and gravitation . Scientists are confronted by the embarrassing fact that they dont know just how much energy , dark or otherwise , space contains . When quantum theorists try to calculate how much energy resides in , say , a quart of seemingly empty space , they get a big number . But astronomers calculating the same quantity from their dark energy observations get a small number . The difference between the two numbers is staggering : Its ten to the 121st power , a one followed by 121 zeroes , an amount far exceeding the number of stars in the observable universe or grains of sand on the planet . Thats the largest disparity between theory and observation in the entire history of science . Clearly something fundamentally important about space and therefore about everything , since galaxies , stars , planets , and people are made mostly of space remains to be learned . Yet just such conundrums have opened the doors of discovery before . Einsteins general relativity theory was invented in part to solve tiny discrepancies between the predicted and the observed orbits of the planet Mercury . Quantum physics sprang in part from little puzzlements about how heat is radiated . How much may be learned , then , by resolving todays much deeper confusions about dark matter and dark energy ? As the physicist Niels Bohr used to say , No paradox , no progress .
In the islands where surfing began , the waves on that particular day were a disappointment mushy , chest high , and annoyingly infrequent . Still , Hawaiians have never needed much of an excuse to grab a board and hit the ocean , and the takeoff zone was packed . Teens on shortboards . Moms on longboards . Grade schoolers on bodyboards . A guy with a gray ponytail on a stand up paddleboard . Some had tribal tattoos in the style of Polynesian warriors . Straddling my surfboard in the deep water beside the reef , I surveyed the crowd with a knot in my stomach , feeling that I didnt belong . Makaha has long been known as a beach where haoles , a Hawaiian term for white people and other outsiders , venture at their peril . Located on Oahus west coast , far from the glitzy North Shore crowds of Sunset Beach or Pipeline or the package tourists at Waikiki Beach , it has a reputation as a tightly cloistered community dominated by descendants of the ancient Polynesian seafarers who settled the islands . Even those Makaha residents who have come to terms with the United States takeover of Hawaii in 1898 and some still have not are determined to prevent the same thing from happening to their waves . Stories are legion of visiting surfers being chased from the water here , a few with broken noses , after breaching some unwritten rule . I was eager to avoid the same fate . For half an hour I floated near the takeoff zone , waiting for my chance , before I finally spotted what appeared to be an unclaimed wave . I spun my board toward the beach and paddled hard . But just as I gained speed , a stone faced teenager on a bodyboard finned up the same wave . He planted his hand firmly on my shoulder and pushed me off the wave , simultaneously propelling himself down its face . I gave up and paddled in . So much for aloha , I thought . But over several weeks in Makaha I came to grasp that what looked like thuggish protectionism was in fact more complicated . Hawaiians , after all , are the original surfing fanatics , having embraced the sport since roughly the time of the Crusades . They are also , in some sense , survivors . Since the coming of the first white men in the late 18th century , their history has been colored by loss first of numbers , as imported diseases burned through their ranks , then of land , nationhood , and culture . Even hula dancing all but vanished . For Hawaiians an increasingly imprecise term after waves of immigration to the islands and generations of intermarriage surfing is a tangible link to the precolonial past and a last remaining shard of cultural identity . Its also a testament to Hawaiians almost mystical connection to the ocean . No wonder they can get a little prickly about their waves . We got nice people here , but if you treat them bad , theyll treat you bad . It wasnt a threat , just a simple statement of fact . The man who uttered it was sitting on a tree limb that had washed up on the beach . Though well past retirement age , he looked like someone you didnt want to cross , a thick chested guy in board shorts , sunglasses , and a black sun visor . His hair was a luxuriant white , and the slablike planes of his face evoked the ancient Hawaiian alii , or chiefs , he counts among his forebears . The guys , if they tell you theyre going to do something to you , they will do something to you , he said . Just remember where youre at . On the subject of Makaha and its customs , there is no higher authority than Richard Buffalo Keaulana , a rare full blooded Hawaiian who has spent most of his 80 years on Oahus West Side . His standing in the community is closely linked to the ocean . Keaulana was a preternaturally gifted surfer as well as Makahas first full time lifeguard and the founder of a well known surfing competition called the Buffalo Big Board Surfing Classic . He remains the most prominent of Makahas famous uncles the mostly Hawaiian elders who serve as guardians of the community and is revered throughout the islands as the apotheosis of the waterman , an aquatic all rounder who combines reverence for the ocean with deep knowledge , skill , and courage . Last of the traditionalists , one admirer told me . The waterman ethos dates to the first Hawaiians , who are believed to have sailed to the islands in double hulled canoes from the Marquesas around AD 700 , followed by similar mariners from Tahiti five centuries later . These settlers probably brought with them some familiarity with surfing , at least in rudimentary form , but only in their new homeland did the sport become an important part of the culture , embraced by chiefs and commoners of both genders on most of Hawaiis eight major islands . There were surfing temples , surfing deities , surfing contests with crowds of onlookers gambling on the outcome . The royals rode massive olo boards hewed from the wood of the wiliwili or the koa tree , while their subjects typically surfed on shorter , thinner alaia boards . A new swell could empty a village for days . New England missionaries , who followed the 1778 landing of British explorer James Cook , often have been blamed for putting a damper on the sport the natives called hee nalu . Their principal objection , it seems , was to the locals preference for surfing in the nude . Far more harmful to surfing , as to Hawaiian society itself , was the arrival of European diseases such as smallpox . By the time Congress formally annexed Hawaii in 1898 , the native population had fallen to about 40000 from as many as 800000 at the time of Cooks landing . The bitter legacy of colonization left an indelible stamp on Hawaiians of Keaulanas generation . He spent his childhood in poverty , much of it on state provided homestead land Hawaiis version of an Indian reservation in the West Side community of Nanakuli . The native language had been purged from public schools in favor of English , though in practice the locals spoke pidgin , an English based creole still common in the area . Keaulana ran away from home at the age of ten , after his abusive stepfather chased him into a taro plot with a knife . He bounced among relatives and friends , dropped out of school after the eighth grade , and endured periods of homelessness , sleeping in cardboard boxes and stealing chickens to survive . The ocean proved his salvation a place to get away , he called it . A powerful swimmer , he learned to fish with a speargun made from a sharpened coat hanger and a length of rubber tubing . As a teenager , he worked as a diver , unsnagging the nets of Filipino fishing sampans from coral reefs . Then he discovered surfing . Of course Keaulana wasnt entirely unfamiliar with the sport that had so obsessed his ancestors . Since the turn of the century Hawaiian beachboys had been teaching tourists how to surf on the gentle breakers of Waikiki , and during Keaulanas childhood a few Hawaiians could still be found riding V bottom redwood boards on a break near Nanakuli . He learned to surf on a crude surfboard made from glued together railroad ties . But he didnt truly embrace the sport until he fell in with a handful of pioneering haole surfers , some from California , who arrived at Makaha in the early 1950s . The newcomers rode lightweight boards made from fiberglass and balsa wood ( soon replaced with polystyrene foam ) and outfitted with fins so they could be turned easily . Makaha became a laboratory for new surfing techniques and board designs as well as the setting for what was billed as the first international surfing contest , in 1954 . Keaulana joined the party and soon emerged as one of the best surfers of his generation , with a fluid , ambidextrous style that he would later showcase in surfing movies and contests as far away as Peru .
After stints in the Army and as a beachboy at Waikiki , Keaulana returned to Makaha in 1960 with a wife and a job as parkkeeper and then lifeguard , bringing up four children in an apartment above a public bathhouse on the beach . Eventually Keaulana was able to build a house , after he rescued a wealthy Texan who was knocked senseless while surfing in big waves . The man gave Keaulana $30000 as an expression of gratitude . Keaulanas renowned waterman skills earned him a prominent role in the Hawaiian cultural and political awakening that came to be known as the Second Hawaiian Renaissance . In 1977 he kicked off his eponymous surfing contest , whose party atmosphere and multiple events canoe surfing , tandem surfing , longboarding recall the ancient Makahiki festival held in honor of the Hawaiian god Lono . Keaulanas chieflike status was enhanced by his burly physique and , when necessary , a look that chills your bones , in the words of his eldest son , Brian , who added , Every local kid knows that look . At the same time , Uncle Buff was nothing if not pragmatic , as he showed in the running of his contest . Tourists who drove up from Honolulu often returned to their rental cars to find windows smashed and wallets missing . Thats the stupid thing they do . They bring a lot of money , Keaulana said . So he identified the locals responsible for the break ins all the thieves and make trouble guys and hired them as security guards . The thefts mostly stopped . In recent years resorts have begun spreading up the West Side , and vacation homes have sprouted amid the modest plantation style houses that cluster on either end of Makahas golden beach . But in other ways little has changed . At a beachside picnic table in the shade of a milo tree , Keaulana and his fellow uncles while away the hours talking story or playing dominoes , and outsiders are received warily , at least at first . You got any ID ? one of the uncles demanded when I first appeared with my notebook and questions . I later asked the same man if he worried about the influx of nonlocals competing for waves , and he assured me that he didnt . We regulate that to death , brah . The communities collectively known as the West Side are situated along Oahus Farrington Highway , which begins west of Pearl Harbor and passes through Makaha before terminating near the islands northwestern tip , called Kaena Point . Running along the base of the Waianae Range , its a rain starved coastal strip thats one of the oldest settled parts of Oahu . Here and there are ruins of stone temples and fishponds , along with more contemporary echoes of Hawaiis past : roadside stands selling poke ( raw fish ) and laulaus ( pork wrapped in taro leaves ) , outrigger canoes hauled up on the beach at Pokai Bay . But for the most part this is not the Hawaii of tourist brochures . In the main town of Waianae the highway is lined with fast food outlets , pawnshops , and scruffy shopping plazas . Homeless people camp in a thicket near the boat basin . I went to Waianae to meet one of Keaulanas make trouble guys , a surfing prodigy with a troubled past named Sheldon Paishon . I turned in to a neighborhood of ramshackle houses , one of which had a bedsheet hanging in the front door . Paishon poked his head through the opening and joined me in my car . Born on the West Side in 1993 , Paishon had a painfully thin build and a crest of floppy , sun bleached hair that he calls a frohawk . I asked whether he wanted breakfast . He declined , explaining that he had eaten well the night before . He told me that his mother had been panhandling at the Waianae Mall , where someone had bought her a bucket of Kentucky Fried Chicken that she brought home to her family . She met the right person , Paishon said . She got blessed . We drove north to Makaha , stopping briefly so that Paishon could retrieve his surfboard of the moment a sorry looking thing with a busted off nose from the bushes where hed stashed it the day before . We continued in the same direction and a few minutes later parked along the beach at Yokohama Bay . Yokes is considered the heaviest break on the West Side , and on this morning it was easy to see why . Thick , powerful waves unfurled across a shallow reef . But Paishon didnt hesitate before joining the dozen or so surfers already in the water , and within moments he was dominating the field . Effortless , devil may care takeoffs , casual tube rides , soaring aerial maneuvers he surfed with a grace and audacity I had rarely seen outside of pro surfing videos . After half an hour , he snapped his board in half and swam back to the beach , holding a piece of it in one hand . A lifeguard who had been watching wagged his head and observed , You shouldnt judge a fish by his ability to climb a tree . It seemed like a cryptic statement , but to anyone who knew Paishon and his history , it made perfect sense : Few surfers on the West Side have shown as much talent in the water while struggling against such long odds on land . There are obvious parallels between Paishons story and Buffalo Keaulanas . Both were raised amid poverty and homelessness , and both found their calling in the ocean . But while Keaulana parlayed his watermans talents into fame and a comfortable living , Paishon struggles to find his place in the world , dreaming of a career in pro surfing but with no obvious path to get there . You had to worry about his future . Like many on the West Side , Paishon has an ambiguous ethnic heritage . His mother , Sharon , is a haole from New Jersey . His pidgin speaking father , Don , is descended from Portuguese immigrants who came to the islands more than a century ago along with Chinese , Japanese , and Filipinos to work on sugarcane plantations . The line between native and non native has long since blurred , and Don Paishon assumes that he and his son carry traces of Hawaiian blood , though he cannot say for sure . Even so , when I asked Sheldon whether he considers himself Hawaiian , he nodded emphatically . In here , he said , tapping himself on the chest . In the heart . But as Paishon takes pride in his Hawaiian identity , he faces many of the challenges that afflict the native population especially on the West Side , one of the states most disadvantaged communities . When he was 12 , his unemployed parents could no longer afford their apartment . For the next several years , the family lived in a tent just north of Makaha in what was then one of Hawaiis largest homeless encampments . Sharon struggled with depression , and Don smoked ice , the popular name for methamphetamine . ( I like the rev and the high , Don told me . ) For their child it was sheer misery , an extended camping trip from hell . Horrible , stinky , rainy , cold , scary , Paishon recalled . Big centipedes crawling in your tent . Sand all over your bed . Its not what people think . A bucket served as the toilet , and a typical dinner was pork and beans heated over an open fire . Like Keaulana before him , Paishon found solace in the ocean , graduating from a bodyboard to a succession of borrowed or discarded surfboards . He was a natural at the sport , and it wasnt long before he caught the eye of the uncles . They supported him with more surfboards ( Paishons aggressive style means that he breaks them on a regular basis ) as well as food , clothing , and advice a modern twist on Hawaiis ancient hanai system , in which families informally adopted the children of friends or relatives and raised them as their own . We his real family over here , one of the uncles told me . By the time Paishon was in his early teens , he was a regular on Oahus highly competitive junior surfing circuit . His rivals turned up at events with their parents , equipped with beach canopies , video cameras , coolers , and surfboards plastered with logos from sponsors . Paishon had no sponsors and was lucky if his mom showed up with a beach towel . But that didnt stop him from winning , sometimes against kids who have gone on to lucrative professional careers . At 15 , he was featured in Surfing magazine . It was a different story at school , where Paishon struggled with basic math and reading and was mocked by his classmates for his mildewed clothes . Everyone would tease me because they knew I was homeless , he said . They called me the slum dog surfer . He began skipping school to surf . When he did show up , teachers yelled at him for reading surfing magazines in class . He dropped out entirely during his second attempt at completing the ninth grade . People who knew Paishon were sympathetic to his plight , but there was only so much they could do . A couple whose son competed with Paishon on the junior circuit offered to take him into their home and pay his way to surfing contests in California and elsewhere , but Paishons mother declined to sign a power of attorney form . Maybe it would have been better , Paishon told me . I would be a world champion by now , probably . Some wounds were self inflicted . Paishon admits he ran with the wrong crowd and smoked pakalolo marijuana sometimes paying for the drug by selling one of the surfboards he had been given . Benefactors began to lose patience . I slapped his head , one of the uncles told me . I told him , Youre wasted talent , another wasted talent on the Waianae side , another lost soul . The biggest setback came when Paishon was accused of stealing $1 ,200 from the girlfriend of a contest organizer . Paishon was never charged , but his reputation was damaged . Potential sponsors turned away . They think , Hes a punk , hes from Waianae , Paishon said bitterly . One late spring night I drove with him past Waianae High School , where the commencement ceremony for the class of 2013 Paishons class , had he stayed in school had just concluded . Paishon watched silently as joyful graduates spilled into the street with their parents and siblings . Several minutes passed . Finally he said , I wish I would have graduated . Six months later I learned that Paishon had found a job . A friend had hired him to clean cars for eight dollars an hour . Everyone is looking at me different now because Im working , he told me . Its my step forward . He said he planned to use his earnings to finance a surfing trip to Indonesia and then return to Hawaii for a new round of contests that he hoped would win the attention of sponsors . I didnt know what I wanted before , he said . Now I know . Be a pro surfer . Thats my dream . After my initial surfing misadventure at Makaha , I went to see Bruce DeSoto , a member of one of Makahas most prominent families . I asked him for advice on avoiding any further unpleasantness in the water . He leaned back in his armchair and replied , When somebody new comes in the lineup , we expect them to introduce themselves and say hi , at least . He continued , The bottom line is respect . You respect , youre welcome , then you come surf our place anytime you want . But if you dont respect , then you got a problem . A few days later I got a chance to put his advice into practice . A fresh swell had rolled in , and the waves were bigger than Id seen them . I paddled out and struck up a conversation with a stocky Hawaiian in his early 40s . It turned out he was a lifeguard in Makaha who shaped surfboards on the side . Bobbing on one of his own creations , he told me proudly about his three kids and their plans to compete in a weekend surfing contest in Honolulu .
Then we both spotted a peak . I looked at him . Mine ? His nod was subtle to the point of telepathy . I paddled hard and dropped in on the wave , a glorious , eight foot wall of cobalt blue that carried me past the reef . Several years ago I made a bet about face mites , animals that live in hair follicles . They are so small that a dozen of them could dance on the head of a pin . They are more likely , though , to dance on your face , which they do at night when they mate , before crawling back into your follicles by day to eat . In those caves mother mites give birth to a few relatively large mite shaped eggs . The eggs hatch , and then , like all mites , the babies go through molts in which they shed their external skeleton and emerge slightly larger . Once theyre full size , their entire adult life lasts only a few weeks . Death comes at the precise moment when the mites , lacking an anus , fill up with feces , die , and decompose on your head . Currently two species of face mites are known ; at least one of them appear to be present on all adult humans . My bet was that even a modest sampling of adults would turn up more species of these mites , ones that are totally new to science . Biologists often make bets ; they call them predictions to sound fancier . My bet was based on an understanding of the tendencies of evolution and of humans . Evolution tends to engender its greatest richness in small forms . Humans , on the other hand , tend to ignore small things . Aquatic mites , for example , live in most lakes , ponds , and even puddles , often in densities of hundreds or thousands per cubic meter . They can even be found in drinking water , yet few people have ever heard of aquatic mites , including , until recently , me . And I study tiny things for a living . Mites also live in dust , where they have found unwelcome fame by eating the bits of dead skin that trail behind us everyplace we go . Our shadows of shed life sustain multitudes . Some of the real monsters of the mite world live in soil , where one can find predatory mites armed with a medieval arsenal of mouthparts . Some have jaws with sharklike teeth ; others bear smooth blades that snap together with tremendous force ; still others stab with sharp and deadly sabers . These beasts stalk the tunnels of worms and the tiny holes between grains of sand . Other mites live in rain forest canopies , on leaves and in the soil that accumulates in the nooks and crannies where branches meet trunks , and in the cups of epiphytic plants . Even some of our food is mity . The flavor of Mimolette cheese comes from their tunneling , eating , excreting , and coupling . In fact , its no exaggeration to say that mites alter the world . They can make soil turn over faster or slower , decomposition speed up or slow down , crops grow sick or healthy . Their little limbs punch far above their weight . Just how many species of mites exist in the world today is not well understood . Probably at least a million , but no one knows enough to say with confidence , nor will anyone know for decades . Museum collections are filled with mite species no one has yet had a chance to study . Some undoubtedly offer fascinating evolutionary stories . Others eat herbivorous insects and could benefit agriculture or medicine . Still others may be vectors for deadly pathogens . Another reason for my bet : Mites are specialists that occupy every conceivable niche , including the trachea of bees , the shafts of feathers , the anuses of turtles , the stink glands of bugs , the digestive systems of sea urchins , the lungs of snakes , the fat of pigeons , the eyeballs of fruit bats , the fur around vampire bat penises . Living in these habitats necessitates special hairs , chemicals , foot pads , mouthparts , and tricks . It also requires a way to get from one patch of good habitat to the next . Some mites ride from flower to flower in the nostrils of hummingbirds . When the bird hovers at a flower , the mite sniffs the blossom to see if its the right kind for finding a mate among the petals . If it is , the mite runs down the birds beak at speeds that are , in terms of body lengths traveled , some of the fastest on Earth . Other mites hitch rides on the backs of beetles or ants ; some fly in the ears of moths . One species of mite hangs on to the hind foot of the army ant Eciton dulcius , and its hind legs serve as surrogates for the ants own claw . Others float through the clouds or on loops of silk that they produce and unfurl into the wind . All of this is to say that if one can imagine a habitat , however narrow , mites are there , even if that habitat is hard to reach on legs just microns long and a tenth the thickness of a human hair . Yet the marvels of mite transport pale in comparison with the idiosyncrasies of mite reproduction . Some clone themselves . Others eat their mothers . Others mate with their sisters while still inside their mothers and then , during birth , kill their mothers . In the nostrils of hummingbirds and the ears of moths lurk Greek tragedies of small , strange lives . The habitats that offer mites the most advantages are bodies , whether of mammals , birds , insects , or any other creature larger than a mite . Bodies are the buffet bus of life , providing food and transportation . Mites that live on bodies are specially adapted to hold fast to their host , even when it runs , swims , or flies . Most bird species host more than one specialized mite found nowhere else . One species of parakeet has 25 different species of mites living on its body and in its feathers , each in a different microhabitat . Rabbits host several species of mites , mice as many as six . Even seals have their own mites . Given such diversity and specialization , its easy to imagine that a roomful of people ( think of all the habitats ! ) would be fertile ground for discovering mites and for making good on my bet . For a long time this was just a conversation starter at slow parties . But recently some collaborators and I gathered a group of folks and asked them to sample their own skin . After some swabbing , poking , and DNA sequencing , we found mites on every adult we sampled , including one species new to science that seems to live mainly on people of Asian descent . Think of it : A mite that probably lives on millions of humans , maybe even billions , and yet it was totally unknown until that moment . I was thrilled . How did mite systematists scientists who name new species respond ? A few were excited ; the rest shrugged . They knew that my bet for mite diversity was an easy one , a fact of life they witness every time they examine a scoop of soil , peer into moss , or swab a friend . In fact , one need look no farther than the mites pictured in this article , most of which are unnamed species . In all likelihood they will long remain that way , mysteries in plain view , like most of life . On a crisp summer morning in Degioz , a slate roofed village in northern Italy , Luigino Jocoll is sharing the local news . He and four other gray haired men are sitting in a tiny caf , sipping cappuccino as espresso machines whir and pastry sugar perfumes the air . But theyre not discussing sports or politics . Three nests ! exclaims Jocoll . His friends murmur and nod . Three nests in a single kilometer ! Extraordinary . Theyre talking about their neighbors . A pair of bearded vultures breeding again in the wild a hundred years after the last one vanished from the Alps has taken up residence near two pairs of golden eagles . The return of a majestic species , and the sight of two top predators living so close together , might be cheered in many places . But in Gran Paradiso National Park , where wilderness and culture live in careful balance , its a matter of daily consequence . Gran Paradiso is Italys oldest national park . Established in 1922 , its tiny by American standards : 274 square miles in the Graian Alps , straddling the Piedmont and Aosta Valley regions in the countrys rugged northwestern corner . But taken together with Frances adjoining Vanoise National Park , its one of the largest protected areas in Western Europe . Drive an hour from Turin and youll know when youve arrived . Highways become switchbacks climbing steeply into Sound of Music country snowcapped mountains , alpine meadows , larch forested valleys carved by rivers and glaciers . The sound of water is constant . The scent of pine is everywhere . In the heart of civilized Europe , the park Italians call big heaven blooms like an earthly Eden . No wonder the past two popes vacationed here . But human hands have shaped the landscape too , leaving fingerprints old and new : Neolithic rock etchings , Roman ruins and medieval castles , solar panels and hydroelectric dams . Since World War II many people have left the area for jobs in cities . Yet some 8 ,400 still live in the parks 13 municipalities , sharing space with more than 50 species of mammals , a hundred kinds of birds , and nearly a thousand types of plants and flowers . Plus 1 .8 million tourists a year . Dominated by its namesake 13 ,324 foot tall massif , Gran Paradiso today is a high altitude hub of wildlife conservation , scientific research , and cultural preservation . But its ironic story begins in the 19th century . And it starts with a mountain goat . If there were no ibex , says Pietro Passerin dEntrves , there would be no Gran Paradiso . The Turin University zoology professor is a historian of the region , where his family has lived since 1270 . On a cloudy day in Cogne , the parks unofficial capital , he tucks into a plate of gnocchi and unpacks the past . From the 16th century to the 19th , he says , alpine ibex were hunted for their meat , horns , blood ( said to boost virility ) , and a bone from which the superstitious made amulets . By 1821 fewer than 50 were left . So in 1856 , after one protective measure had failed , Victor Emmanuel II set aside a royal reserve to save the species for himself . The Savoy king loved to hunt , and the graceful ibex were his favorite quarry . Soon paths were cleared , lodges built , villages absorbed into the new territory . Hunters and poachers were hired as game wardens . And locals were paid to organize the kings annual hunt . By 1900 , when Victor Emmanuel III took the throne , the ibex population had swelled to 2000 . But as war engulfed Europe , the new king was too busy to hunt . So in 1920 he turned the hunting preserve into a true sanctuary , which he donated to the state . Two years later the area was granted national park status .
The parks creation has led to state landowner squabbles , but ibex poaching is no longer an issue : There have been just a handful of reported cases in the past ten years . Thats because the local economy is vested in ecotourism and because the park assigns 58 wardens to patrol 175 ,553 acres spread over five valleys . As the sun burns off the last tatters of morning cloud , one of those wardens climbs an old hunting path from the pine thick Valsavarenche valley to the boulder strewn Nivolet Plateau . A hulking man with a mournful face , Giovanni Bracotto pauses at the pass to point out stone ruins of cattle barns dotting the slopes and pastures that sit above a tumble of scree . A hundred years ago , he says , the economy here was agricultural . The grass had more nutrients then , so the milk was better . The summer cheese was too . But many things have changed . Including the wardens jobs . Working alone from dawn to dusk 14 hours in summer they repair trails , assist hikers , and monitor the parks 59 ( shrinking ) glaciers . They also keep tabs on wildlife . Using GPS , computer tablets , telescopes , and thermographic cameras , Bracotto and his crew help the parks scientists tag , collar , and tally ibex and chamois , the parks other wild goat . Last September their ibex count 2 ,772 confirmed a 20 year trend : When it comes to the parks spirit animal , theres trouble in Gran Paradiso . As dusk cloaks the Alps in shadow , Achaz von Hardenberg lowers his binoculars . The parks fair skinned , German born biologist is standing on the rim of a peaceful valley called Levionaz , waiting to weigh ibex . Earlier , during the fine warm day , herds of four and five were loping elegantly across the plateau and grazing high on the cirques slopes . But tonight theyre ignoring the salt lick von Hardenberg has set up next to an electronic scale . I dont know where they could be , he mutters . In 1993 you couldnt miss them : There were nearly 5000 in the park , a high water mark . Their numbers have been dwindling ever since . No one is sure why , but theories abound . Von Hardenberg has two of his own . One is that older females are breeding now , producing weaker kids that are less equipped to thrive . His other theory is rooted in climate change : Grass used to peak here in high summer , when ibex kids are born . Now , because theres less snow , the grass grows earlier in the year . That means newborns have less to eat , less nutritious milk to drink and less chance of living long enough to claim mates and have kids of their own . Von Hardenberg is hoping an analysis of satellite data showing how alpine meadow vegetation has changed over three decades will help solve the mystery . But ibex are an age old puzzle , he says . In coastal Puglia , the heel of Italys boot , fossil remains reveal the animals ancient presence . So did the guts of tzi , the 5300 year old preserved mummy found in 1991 ; DNA analysis indicated that ibex meat was part of his last meal . Yet after all this time theyre still not well adapted to life up here , says von Hardenberg . They were hunted in the lowlands during prehistoric times , which may have been what pushed them to the highlands . Over thousands of years theyve adjusted to the harsh climate , but they still dont thrive in deep winter snow . As the night wears on in Levionaz , the valley stirs . A marmot sips from a rushing stream . A fox finds a dead chamois in a crevasse and enjoys a hasty dinner . But ibex are nowhere to be seen . Ibex are Gran Paradisos raison dtre , but they arent the only inhabitants of note . In the gneiss hills above Nivolet , a researcher named Luca Corlatti is tracking chamois , less famous but more populous than ibex latest count , about 8000 with numbers remaining stable . On the green slopes of Orvieille , Caterina Ferrari is deciphering the personalities and social structures of marmots furry , bearlike rodents that lumber comically through the tall grass , whistling coded warnings to each other . And on a raft in Lake Djouan , Rocco Tiberti has netted thousands of brook trout , removing a species thats gobbled up insects and other native organisms since it was imported in the 1960s . Then theres the wolf . In 2007 , more than a century after the species was exterminated here , a pack of seven appeared in Aosta Valley . When a few shepherds lost sheep , the wolves were blamed . In 2011 the pack vanished probably shot , says von Hardenberg but the next year another pair arrived , this time in the lush Soana Valley . By last fall there were at least five again . Bruno Bassano , the parks veterinarian and scientific manager , says the wolves are a boon : They cull foxes and wild boars , balancing the ecology . But locals are divided . Some call the animals a monstrous threat to their livestock . Others monetize them . In a delicatessen in the village of Piamprato , T shirts with cute wolf cartoons hang for sale alongside strips of prosciutto . Anna Rotella is untroubled . On a bright July morning in Valsavarenche , she and her partner , Claudio Duguet , milk dozens of white sheep and goats , then lead the flock across the turbulent Savara River , where the grass is good . Only the ignorant people fear the wolf , Rotella says . Educated farmers and shepherds know it is not evil . It is just hungry , like anything else . Over on the Piedmont side of the park , the ruddy faced Longo family Beppe , Lina , and their grown son , Claudio , plus his girlfriend , Licia say the wolves dont bother them either . They live in a stone house with a leaning A frame , ringed by emerald slopes veined with waterfalls and avalanche stains . Everything here is done by hand , as it was a hundred years ago . A cell phone is the only concession to modernity . As chickens squawk and cowbells clonk , Beppe and Claudio pull six round blocks of cheese from a rusted iron cauldron boiling with freshly drawn milk . Lina scoops softball size chunks of butter from an old churn , then pounds the yellow globs into a bricklike block . Licia washes clothes in a bathtub , using a scrub , a rock , and water delivered by a Rube Goldbergesque sluice system that snakes up the hill . About ten other families in the valley live similarly . Its a break even existence : The profit they make from selling their dairy products at market covers rent and little else . But , says Lina , its a lifestyle thats as priceless as it is timeless . Back at the caf in Degioz , Luigino Jocoll says theres not enough money for national parks these days , and too much bureaucracy . As environmental laws clash with building codes and business interests , it can be hard to maintain the parks unique blend of culture and conservation . Which is nothing new . In Gran Paradiso , says Jocoll , we always have to balance social and natural priorities . Frank Behrens , a gregarious pitchman for a Dutch development company that sees profit , not loss , in climate change , cuts the engine on our 22 foot Hurricane runabout . We drift through brackish water toward the middle of privately owned Maule Lake in North Miami Beach . Its not quite paradise . The lake , like so many others in Florida , began as a rock quarry . In the years since , it has served as a venue for boat races , a swimming hole for manatees , and a set for the 1960s TV show Flipper . More recently , as if to underscore the impermanence of South Floridas geography , more than one developer has toyed with partially filling in the lake to build condos . Behrens is promoting a floating village with 29 private , artificial islands , each with a sleek , four bedroom villa , a sandy beach , a pool , palm trees , and a dock long enough to accommodate an 80 foot yacht . The price : $12 .5 million apiece . Dutch Docklands , Behrenss firm , has optioned the lake and is marketing the islands as a rich mans antidote to climate change . As for the risks from rising sea levels , well , thats the beauty of floating homes . The islands would be anchored to the lake bottom with a telescoping tether similar to those that enable floating oil rigs to ride out the roughest hurricanes . The floating village plan is part of a frenetic building boom , fueled by wealthy South Americans and Europeans buying with cash , that is transforming Miamis skyline . From our boat we can see construction cranes cluttering the sky along the barrier island of Sunny Isles , where crme de la crme luxury is the hot trend . In a real estate market that celebrates opulence the $560 million Porsche Design Tower features glass walled car elevators that stop at every apartment it was probably inevitable that the greatest threat to South Floridas existence would be used as a promotional strategy . The Dutch project sounds like one more loopy development in a long history of loopy Florida developments . But its climate conscious design sets it apart from most of the surrounding high rises , which are going up with little consideration for the rising seas projected to frequently flood South Florida in the coming decades and to submerge much of it by the end of the century . These contradictory approaches plunge ahead , even if only for one more mortgage cycle , or look ahead , preparing for whats coming reflect a turning point in the discussion about climate change . As warnings about global warming become more dire and the consequences increasingly evident , more and more businesses , and local officials , are factoring climate change into their decisions about the future . Theyre focused less on reducing the carbon emissions that are warming the planet thats for political leaders and more on adapting to severe weather and flooding , which is already occurring as seas rise . And in towns like Miami , where real estate development is an economic engine , businesses are focused on how to keep that growth growing for as long as they can . Behrens , who spent his boyhood in Aruba , moved to Miami a decade ago . He signed on with Dutch Docklands in 2013 , after it became clear that the regions civic leaders were awakening to the depth of their impending disaster . The firms visionaries in Delft foster no illusion that their floating village could save South Florida . Its only one innovative water project among many in the Dutch tool kit that has preserved the low lying Netherlands since the Middle Ages . Still , Behrens says , the projects value as a high end venture appeals to investors in a region that will have to be reimagined in the coming decades . And if the floating village succeeds , a range of other possibilities opens up : floating communities with floating parks and floating schools . A floating hospital . You name it , says the man whose company built a floating prison outside Amsterdam . People only see the negative effects of flooding , Behrens says , without a trace of irony . We need to show people there is a way to make money out of this . For the government , there are tax dollars . For developers , their investment is secured for the next 50 years . There is a lot of money involved in this climate change . It will be a whole new industry . Florida is a good place to see the costs and potential profits of climate change emerging into sharper view . Many coastal places are at risk , but Florida is one of the most vulnerable . While government leaders around the world , in Washington , and even in Floridas statehouse in Tallahassee dither over climate change , here on Floridas southern tip more than a few civic leaders are preparing . Floridas future will be defined by a noisy , contentious public debate over taxes , zoning , public works projects , and property rights a debate forced by rising waters . Along with rising seas , Florida will be battered in the coming decades by extreme weather dry season drought and rainy season deluges the US governments National Climate Assessment predicts . Heat and drought threaten an agricultural industry that supplies the East Coast with winter vegetables , and they could undermine the three mainstays of Florida farming tomatoes , sugarcane , and citrus . The rainy season will be stormier , with fiercer hurricanes and higher storm surges . The most profound disruption will occur along the states 1 ,350 miles of coastline . Three quarters of Floridas 18 million people live in coastal counties , which generate four fifths of the economy . Coastal development , including buildings , roads , and bridges , was valued in 2010 at two trillion dollars . Already more than half the states 825 miles of sandy beaches are eroding . Four southern counties Monroe , Miami Dade , Broward , and Palm Beach are home to about one third of Floridas population , and about 2 .4 million people live less than four feet above the high tide line . The streets of Fort Lauderdale , Hollywood , and Miami Beach often flood during the occasional king tides , which are much higher than normal high tides . The oceans could rise two feet by 2060 , according to the National Climate Assessment , as their waters warm and expand and as the Greenland and polar ice sheets melt . By 2100 seas could rise as much as 6 .6 feet . That would put much of Miami Dade underwater . For every foot the seas rise , the shoreline would move inland 500 to 2000 feet . A two foot rise would be enough to strand the Miami Dade County sewage treatment plant on Virginia Key and the nuclear power plant at Turkey Point , both on Biscayne Bay . At two feet they will be sitting out in the ocean , says Hal Wanless , chairman of the University of Miamis geology department . Most of the barrier islands will be uninhabitable . The airport is going to have problems at four feet . We will not be able to keep freshwater above ocean levels , so were going to have saltwater intrusion into our drinking water supply . Everyone wants a nice happy ending . But thats not reality . Were in for it . We have really done a job warming our ocean , and its going to pay us back . Wanless , who is 72 , didnt think hed witness the serious effects of climate change in his lifetime . For three decades he was a lonely voice warning that the warming ocean could inundate South Florida . In the 1980s he documented that barnacles were attaching themselves higher on bridge piers in Coral Gables , where he lives , than they were in the 1940s . In recent years he analyzed the shrinking glaciers in Greenland and concluded that the main scientific modeling used to calculate sea level rise hadnt fully accounted for accelerating ice melt . Last year the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change gave greater weight to ice sheet melt in its calculations , raising its projections for sea level rise . Floridas long , low coastline may make it more vulnerable , but no region is immune . In 2012 , flooding , wildfires , drought , and storms around the country caused more than $110 billion in damages , the second costliest year in US history . In a foreshadowing of severe weather to come globally , Typhoon Haiyan spiraled across Southeast Asia in 2013 and struck the Philippines , killing 6 ,200 people . That year also saw crop destroying droughts on nearly every continent , most notably in Africa and South Asia . The Brazilian Highlands , the center of South Americas monsoon region , experienced the worst drought since 1979 , prompting water rationing . Rapid glacial melting in the Andes and Himalaya will exacerbate water shortages in Peru , India , and Nepal . The coming decades , the World Bank predicts , will see political instability , food shortages , and famine , leading to the displacement of millions of people . South Asias and Southeast Asias heavily populated coasts , particularly those in Bangladesh and Vietnam , could be inundated . Worse , rising seas could invade major river deltas , poisoning them with salt water and destroying some of the worlds richest agricultural land . The Mekong River Delta in Vietnam , where 17 million people live and half the countrys rice supply is grown , is already battling saltwater intrusion . In South Florida civic leaders have begun to map out their future on their own . Little help has come from the state legislature , which is controlled by Republicans , many of whom remain skeptical of climate science . Rick Scott , the Republican governor , has mostly avoided the subject , repeatedly declaring , Im not a scientist . Last summer , after five of Floridas top climate scientists , including Wanless , briefed Scott , he thanked them and said nothing else . The four southern counties have drafted a general to do list that would reengineer the region , step by step , through 2060 . A detailed blueprint will be years in the making . But the approach is largely familiar . We will do what we always have done , says Joe Fleming , a Miami land use attorney . We will dredge and prop everything up . Harvey Ruvin , a former county commissioner who headed a sea level rise task force for Miami Dade County , lays out the thinking so far : The whole idea is to do this comprehensive capital plan that would include all kinds of things desalination plants , the lifting of roads , where to raise land , where to create canals . Part of the future has to be raising some land at the expense of other land .
Ruvin knows what hes up against . Procrastination . Disputes over property rights . Long battles over changing zoning and building codes to prohibit building in areas that cant be protected . And he doesnt want to talk about the cost of all that reengineering . I cant even give you a real number . Maybe $50 billion ? Ruvin muses , though he knows thats low . Hes focused on how to pay for long term projects in a place that operates on capturing short term gains . How do you take this to the voters for a bond issue when the county commissioners are afraid to increase property taxes a hair to fund libraries ? Now the Miami Dade County Court clerk , Ruvin , at 77 , is one of the regions most skillful politicians . He has tried to use the consequences of doing nothing on climate change to prod footdraggers . Its the same strategy used by Michael Bloomberg , a former mayor of New York City , and Henry Paulson , a former US Treasury secretary ; in 2014 they assembled financial heavyweights to catalog the cost of inaction on climate change in every region of the country . Last year Ruvin invited two executives from Swiss Re , the global reinsurance giant , to brief his task force about Floridas precarious future . The hard nosed number crunchers created a predictive model that showed the region could expect annual losses from storm related events to reach $33 billion by 2030 , up from $17 billion in 2008 . They also said those losses could be reduced by 40 percent if the region acted soon to protect vulnerable real estate . These kinds of issues cannot just be left for another 10 , 20 , or 30 years time , says Mark Way , a sustainability specialist for Swiss Re . Another factor , Way says , is that subsidized government insurance programs in Florida have skewed the marketplace , leading to underpriced rates that dont reflect the actual risks . That has the net effect of basically encouraging development directly or indirectly in areas that otherwise dont make any sense . Already civic leaders are fortifying seawalls and installing pumps . Later come more daunting projects : moving utilities from the coasts and protecting high value real estate universities , hospitals , airports , and tourist areas that drive Floridas economy . Their watchwords are protect , accommodate , and retreat , which sound a lot like a civil engineers version of the stages of grief . But the group is an optimistic one . It doesnt do any good to set your hair on fire for something thats 70 years out , says Kristin Jacobs , a former Broward County commissioner and member of President Barack Obamas climate change task force who was elected to the Florida legislature last fall . She puts her faith in technology . If you look at settlement across the planet since time began , we evolve to what we need , she says . Other countries , like Holland , have figured out a way to be resilient . We are looking to be resilient . The Dutch have been trawling for business in coastal cities from Jakarta to San Francisco . They established a beachhead in South Florida several years ago when Behrens founded a Dutch chamber of commerce in Miami . In the Netherlands , where two thirds of the population lives at or below sea level , about 450 companies make water their business , accounting for about 4 percent of the economy . Thats on a par with the auto industry in the United States . Piet Dircke , whose firm , Arcadis , helped New Orleans design new levees after Hurricane Katrina , made his fourth trip from Holland to Miami last summer to participate in a workshop with architects and engineers . Dircke and representatives of four other Dutch firms drew beautiful sketches showing adaptive designs for vulnerable areas . Our delta is one of the best places to invest your money , he says . Rotterdam is a showcase for the world for being an adaptive city . Singapore , Copenhagen , Stockholm these are all cities that emphasize their water identity and make it a sales objective . Miami could become a water city . It will take technology not yet imagined to overcome the challenges posed by South Floridas unusual geology : the limestone bedrock that is both a blessing and a curse . Mined , limestone provides fill to build roads and create what constitutes high ground . In its natural state , its a porous sponge . Water runs through it . It cant be plugged . Seawalls can be raised as the city of Miami Beach has ordered . But seawalls , no matter how high , cant stop water that bubbles up from beneath . Even the Dutch would have difficulty protecting the narrow , seven mile barrier island that is Miami Beach , a top tourist destination . Welcome to ground zero of ground zero , says Bruce Mowry , the city engineer , when I meet him at the corner of 20th Street and Purdy Avenue , one of the lowest points in Miami Beach . Hes basking in the afterglow of success : $100 million and 20 new pumps kept the city mostly dry during the October king tide . A year earlier a kayaker had paddled along Purdy not exactly the kind of image that attracts tourists . The new pumps are part of a $300 million overhaul of the citys antiquated storm drainage system . With 80 new pumps , Mowry hopes to buy Miami Beach another two or three decades . By then , according to the Union of Concerned Scientists , the city could face 237 floods a year . Miami Beach will never not exist , he says . But it will exist in a different way . We may have floating residential areas . We could have elevated roads built up on pilings . We could convert a transportation corridor to water . People ask me , Bruce , can this be done ? I say , It can be done , but can you afford it ? The city has begun an experiment in elevating roads and sidewalks , starting with Purdy Avenue , where a building with a caf , liquor store , and dress shop flooded badly in 2013 . The sidewalk and street will be raised by two feet , which should keep water from sloshing into the shops . Two feet wont solve the problem . But with funding and community support uncertain , city officials decided to start small . Two feet buys the life of this building , Mowry says . You cant come in and make radical changes . If Miami has a future as one of the worlds water cities , it probably will look more like the Florida Keys than Stockholm . And so I make the trip down the Overseas Highway to Key West , past houses on stilts , marine equipment shops , and pine trees dying from saltwater poisoning . Golf courses in the Keys are now planted with salt tolerant grass . The islands are the exposed remnants of an ancient coral reef . Most are less than five feet above sea level . Reefs can protect coastal regions from storm surges . If healthy , reefs can keep up with sea level rise , growing higher as the ocean rises . But much of the reef off Florida died in the late 1970s from disease . When you dive on the reef today , its an absolute boneyard of dead coral , says Chris Langdon , a University of Miami oceanographer . Warmer , more acidic oceans are keeping the reef from recovering . Langdon is working to identify a coral that can tolerate those conditions . One way to think of their economic value is to imagine if this job went to the Army Corps , and they had to build a seawall 150 miles long , and every few years they had to build it a little higher , he says . The reefs do that for free . The highway , also known as US 1 , strings together the island chain with 42 bridges . The population in the Keys is limited to the number of people who can be evacuated by vehicle within 24 hours , ahead of approaching hurricanes . Chris Bergh of the Nature Conservancy joins me at Big Pine Key . He arrived in the Keys from Pennsylvania as a toddler in the back of his parents 1973 Volkswagen bus and has no plans to move . Ive got a six year old , he says . I expect Ill live out my days here , and he will not . At some point an economist is going to say , Look , its going to cost one billion dollars to redo US 1 , and thats only going to buy us 20 more years . The question is , what will it cost us to buy time so we can keep on keeping on ? The end of the line is Key West , closer to Havana than to Miami . At City Hall we meet up with Don Craig , a planner whos worked for the city for more than two decades . The city has spent millions in recent years to add pumps , construct a fire station at a higher elevation , and rebuild portions of the seawall that nearly encircles the island . But options are limited . Raising elevations on any large scale is out of reach . We do not have a nearby source of fill material , he says . Were 118 miles from the major rock quarries . When Craig tells people that the Keys lifeline , the highway , will lie underwater someday , it elicits four responses . Some become fearful , he says . Some say , Well , Ill be dead , so I dont care . Others say , There is not a consensus that this is going to happen , so why are you telling us this ? The other reaction is mute silence . Craigs own response : migrate . He knows something about that . My parents were Okies , he says . During the Dust Bowl years they lost the family farm in Oklahoma and moved to California , where Craig was born . Some 2 .5 million people left the Great Plains in the 1930s to escape the largest man made environmental catastrophe in American history to date . Theres something surreal about the pace of construction in a region that may be inundated by 2100 . On an early morning flight over northwest Broward County , I watch a dredge scooping up fill to form finger peninsulas on a man made lake in a housing tract being built against the Everglades . On a boat ride up the Miami River in downtown Miami , I pass a 1 .25 acre parcel right on the rivers edge that sold for $125 million last spring a record price here . Nearby , the one billion dollar Brickell City Centre , under construction on nine acres , is so enormous it has a cement plant on site . Across town a $600 million convention center with an 1 ,800 room hotel is planned . The biggest economic challenge posed by climate change in South Florida may be one that business leaders are loath to discuss that fear of this slow speed crisis could stall development . Its almost like , Shhhh . Dont talk about it , and so its not real , says Richard Grasso , an environmental law professor at Fort Lauderdales Nova Southeastern University . But privately , quietly , conversations are under way . Last fall executives from the regions big banks , insurers , and development companies convened an invitation only roundtable in Miami with Lloyds of London . One insurance executive told the group that homeowners in some vulnerable areas already pay premiums that are higher than their mortgage payments . There was concern that rising insurance rates are not sustainable and people may be left with no recourse but to leave Miami or go uninsured , which is not an option for those with mortgages , says Kerri Barsh , a Miami land use attorney who represents Dutch Docklands . If insurance costs continue to spiral upward , they could have a negative cascading effect on the South Florida economy and beyond . Unaffordable insurance could trigger an economic calamity that would make the 2008 housing market collapse here seem like an inconvenience . If homeowners couldnt get insurance , bankers would stop lending , which would create a shortage of cash , which would cause property values to decline and the regions economy to tank . One way to keep the building boom going is for civic leaders to not look too far into the future . Thus the four southern counties focus on 2060 instead of 2100 . Theres a certain logic to that . The average life span of most buildings is 50 years , and Miami , a mere 119 years old , is continuously rebuilding itself . They dont want to look beyond two feet of sea level rise . This was a deliberate thing not to be too scary , Wanless says . So theres going to be a lot of throwing money in the ocean before we realize its time to move on . Phil Stoddard , in his third term as mayor of South Miami , is one of the few politicians willing to talk about when that time might come . He met me at his house , a one story stucco bungalow with stone floors ( Flood Prep 101 ) , solar panels on the roof , and a large pond that takes up most of the backyard , where he and his wife swim with Lola the koi and an eight year old bass named Ackwards . I tell people to buy high , sell low , he says drily , pausing to allow the joke to sink in . Stoddard , also a biology professor at Florida International University in Miami , came up with his own scenario , doodled during a long , dull meeting about climate change that dwelled on sea oats , a native grass whose roots hold dunes in place . I said to myself , Were looking at something majorly disastrous here and were talking about sea oats ? he recalls . He drew a graph with three lines that show population , property values , and sea level all rising . Then abruptly , population growth and property values plummet . Something is going to upset the applecart , he says . A hurricane , a flood , another foot of sea rise , the loss of freshwater . People are going to stop coming here and bail . He thinks a real estate sell off is inevitable . Before that happens , he wants his constituents to be informed . People ask me this question , Im X years old . I have X amount of net worth in my house . What should I do ? I say , If you need the value of that house to retire or to live on , then you want to cash out at some point . It doesnt have to be this year . But dont wait 20 years . Not long ago Stoddard attended a meeting where Wanless presented his analysis showing that the accelerating disintegration of the ice sheets will lead to a more rapid rise of sea levels faster and higher than the federal governments projections . That night , as Stoddard and his teenage daughter walked on moonlit Miami Beach , he shared what hed heard . She went silent , and then said to me , I wont be living here , will I ? And I said , No , you wont . Kids get it . Do you think we should tell their parents ? Another horrendous act of terrorism has taken place and people like myself who are on media speed dial under Celebrity Muslims are thrust in the spotlight to angrily condemn , disavow , and explain again how these barbaric acts are in no way related to Islam . For me , religion no matter which one is ultimately about people wanting to live humble , moral lives that create a harmonious community and promote tolerance and friendship with those outside the religious community . Any religious rules should be in service of this goal . The Islam I learned and practice does just that . Violence committed in the name of religion is never about religion its ultimately about money . The 1976 movie , All the Presidents Men , got it right when it reduced the Daedalus maze of the Watergate scandal to the simple phrase , Follow the money . Forget the goons who actually carry out these deadly acts , they are nothing more than automated drones remote controlled by others . Instead of radio signals , their pilots use selective dogma to manipulate their actions . They pervert the Quran through omission and false interpretation . How is it about money ? When one looks at the goal of these terrorist attacks , its clearly not about scaring us into changing our behavior . The Twin Tower attacks of 9/11 didnt frighten America into embracing Islam . The fatwa against Salman Rushdie didnt prevent the publication of The Satanic Verses . Like all terrorist attacks on the West , they just strengthen our defiant resolve . So the attack in Paris , as with most others , isnt about changing Western behavior , its about swaggering into a room , flexing a muscle , and hoping to elicit some admiring sighs . In this case , the sighs are more recruits and more donations to keep their organization alive . They have to keep proving they are more relevant than their competing terrorist groups . Its just business . Nor should we blame Americas foreign policy as the spark that lights the fuse . Poverty , political oppression , systemic corruption , lack of education , lack of critical thinking , and general hopelessness in these countries is the spark . Yes , weve made mistakes that will be used to justify recruiting new drones . But we shouldnt kid ourselves that the recent report detailing our extensive and apparently ineffective use of torture caused any kind of mass terrorist volunteers . The world knew we tortured . The only thing the report revealed was how bad we were at it . More important , if recruits were swayed by logical idealism , they would realize that the fact that we conducted , released , and debated such a report is what makes America admirable . We dont always do the right thing , but we strive to . We admit our faults and make adjustments . It may be glacial , but its movement forward . Knowing that these terrorist attacks are not about religion , we have to reach a point where we stop bringing Islam into these discussions . I know we arent there yet because much of the Western population doesnt understand the Islamic religion . All they see are brutal beheadings , kidnappings of young girls , bloody massacres of children at schools , and these random shootings . Naturally , they are frightened when they hear the word Muslim or see someone in traditional Muslim clothing . Despite any charitable impulses , they also have to be thinking , Better safe than sorry as they hurry in the opposite direction . When the Ku Klux Klan burn a cross in a black familys yard , prominent Christians arent required to explain how these arent really Christian acts . Most people already realize that the KKK doesnt represent Christian teachings . Thats what I and other Muslims long for the day when these terrorists praising the Prophet Muhammad or Allahs name as they debase their actual teachings are instantly recognized as thugs disguising themselves as Muslims . Its like bank robbers wearing masks of presidents ; we dont really think Jimmy Carter and George W . Bush hit the Bank of America during their down time . We cant end terrorism any more than we can end crime in general . Ironically , terrorism is actually an act against the very religion they claim to believe in . Its an acknowledgement that the religion and its teachings arent enough to convince people to follow it . Any religion that requires coercion is not about the community , but about the leaders wanting power . I look forward to the day when an act of terrorism by self proclaimed Muslims will be universally dismissed as nothing more than a criminal attack of a thuggish political organization wearing an ill fitting Muslim mask . To get to that point , we will need to teach our communities what the real beliefs of Islam are . In the meantime , keep my name on speed dial so we can get through this together . We do not attack religion , but we do when it gets involved in politics .
Charlie Hebdo editor Gerard Biard defended the satirical magazines decision to put a cartoon depiction of the Prophet Muhammad on its cover following this months brutal terrorist attacks , in an interview that aired Sunday . We do not attack religion , but we do when it gets involved in politics , Biard , who was in London during the attack on Charlie Hebdo , said on NBCs Meet the Press . Charlie Hebdo has had a history of controversy with its mocking of several religions , particularly Islam . The French weeklys cover image following the attacks on its office defiantly portrays the Prophet Muhammad holding a sign reading , Je Suis Charlie . The issue both sold out and sparked worldwide opposition from some groups . Here are three more clips from Biards interview . Biard explains how Charlie Hebdo is coping with the aftermath of the attacks , which left 12 dead , including 10 staff members . 57% believed that similar cartoons should continue to be printed . More than 4 in 10 French people believe Charlie Hebdo shouldnt publish cartoons depicting the prophet Muhammad , given that many Muslims find the images offensive , according to a recent poll by a French publication , published Sunday . A survey conducted by Le Journal du Dimanche , a French weekly newspaper , presented participants with this information : Some Muslims feel attacked or injured by the publication of cartoons of the Prophet Muhammad . In the final tally of responses , 42% checked a box to indicate that the country should consider these reactions and avoid publishing these cartoons , while 57% of respondents checked we should ignore these reactions and continue to publish such cartoons . The remaining 1% checked no opinion . xtreme weather , sometimes related to climate change , seems to be everywhere these days . And yet it can be hard to see the impact on individual lives . I began documenting that impact in 2007 , when I photographed two floods that occurred within weeks of each other , one in the UK and the other in India . I was deeply struck by the contrasting effects of these floods and the shared vulnerability that seemed to unite their victims . Since then I have visited flood zones around the world , traveling to Haiti , Pakistan , Australia , Thailand , Nigeria , Germany , the Philippines , and the UK again . In flooded landscapes , life is suddenly turned upside down , and normality is suspended . Portraits rest at the heart of this project . I often follow my subjects as they return home through deep waters , and work with them to create an intimate image in their flooded homes . Though their poses may be conventional , their environment is disconcertingly altered . Often theyre angry about their circumstances or the inadequate response from the authorities . Many want their plight to be witnessed and want the world to know what has happened to them . I shoot on film with old Rolleiflex cameras . Digital would be easier , but the texture of film has a particular quality for me , and the process of using an old camera adds formality and gravitas to the situation . The flood is an ancient metaphor in many cultures , a destructive force that renders humans powerless . As weather becomes more extreme , the biblical is becoming literal Air Force Staff Sgt Robert Bo Wester ( Ret . ) was an explosive ordnance disposal technician in Iraq . He faced hundreds of IEDs without incident and a few with grievous consequences . Most of my injuries are invisible , and the rest are hidden , he says . Army Maj . Jeff Hall ( Ret . ) was 35 feet from a car bomb when it went off in a crowded marketplace north of the city of Baghdad . He didnt lose his arms or his legs or suffer visible wounds . But I am just not the same human being as I used to be , he says . Brain injuries caused by the shock waves generated by explosions have become the signature injury of the Afghanistan and Iraq wars , leaving hundreds of thousands of US soldiers and veterans with a life altering list of debilitating conditions , including headaches , seizures , sleep disorders , and memory and cognitive difficulties . The range of symptoms and their similarity to PTSD can complicate diagnosis and treatment . Its a mystery that has dogged soldiers and scientists since World War I , when exploding artillery shells left men shell shocked . Even today there is no consensus within the medical community about the nature of blast induced injury or by what mechanism blast force damages the brain , Caroline Alexander writes in this issue . As of now , the only wholly reliable method of directly examining the biological effects of blast force on the human brain is autopsy . Which doesnt do much for vets like Wester and Hall , who struggle daily . If there isnt a cure , at least there are ways to cope . At Walter Reed Medical Center in Bethesda , Maryland , soldiers at the National Intrepid Center of Excellence paint masks that help them reveal their inner feelings . Some were initially dismissive : Number one , Im a man , and I dont like holding a dainty little paintbrush . Number two , Im not an artist . And number three , Im not in kindergarten , said Army Staff Sgt . Perry Hopman . Today he says , I was wrong  I think this is what started me kind of opening up and talking about stuff and actually trying to get better . Major Hall agrees . He painted a gruesome , bloodstained mask part of the skull missing , brain exposed . I had seen a person who looked like this , he explains . I dont know why , but thats what needed to come out of me . The artwork , he says , is a silent testimony to pain that speaks volumes yet has the capacity to heal . You cant put it into words that people will believe , or if you do put it into words , they get tired of it . But the art just expresses itself . It relieves the soldier , because you get tired of trying to explain what is going on in there . The artwork is like a printed page it is there if you want to read it . We invite you to read our soldiers masks and the stories they tell . When water vapor in hot aircraft exhaust hits very cold , moist air , it freezes . That creates white contrails , which can spread into wispy cirrus clouds with climate change potential . Some reflect the suns heat before it reaches Earths surface , for a cooling effect . But overall , contrail cirrus clouds trap heat and , by one estimate , contribute more to warming than aircraft carbon dioxide emissions do .Planes could be rerouted to avoid contrail inducing weather , a study in Environmental Research Letters found . In one case , a 13 .7 mile detour in a transatlantic flight eliminated a contrail 62 miles long and the clouds it would have spurred so even counting extra emissions from the detour , the flight resulted in less warming . Nonetheless , no one suggests rerouting planes yet . Forecasters can predict contrail formation , says study author Emma Irvine but whether the forecasts are accurate enough to justify flight adjustments is still up in the air .It was tempting to think we were going back in time , slipping the bonds of the modern world for tribal life in one of the last great bastions of indigenous culture , chronically jeopardized but still vital , intact , unvanquished . The outsiders who first ventured into the southeast Amazon Basin centuries ago missionaries , El Dorado seekers , slave traders , jaguar skin hunters , rubber tappers , wilderness explorers known as sertanistas traveled by river on laborious boat journeys . We had a single engine Cessna and good weather on a September morning late in the dry season . The plane clawed through the haze of forest fires around the Brazilian frontier town of Tucum . After half an hour heading south and west at a hundred knots , we crossed the twisting course of the muddy Rio Branco , and suddenly there were no more fires , no more roads , no more ragged clear cut pastures stippled with herds of white cattle , nothing but trackless forest wreathed in mist . Below us lay Kayapo Indian country , five officially demarcated tracts of contiguous land that in sum make up an area about the size of Kentucky . The reserve , which is among the largest protected expanses of tropical rain forest in the world , is controlled by 9000 indigenous people , most of whom cant read or write and who still follow a largely subsistence way of life in 44 villages linked only by rivers and all but invisible trails . Our National Geographic crew was headed to one of the most remote , the village of Kendjam , which means standing stone and which took its name from a dark gray mountain that now appeared before us , arcing some 800 feet above the green canopy like a breaching whale . A little past the mountain lay the glittering braids of the Iriri River , the largest tributary of the Xingu , itself a major tributary of the Amazon . The Cessna swerved down on a dirt airstrip slashed through the forest between the rock and the river and taxied past small garden plots and thatch houses arranged in a circle around a sandy plaza . When we got out , a dozen or so kids wearing only shorts or nothing at all swarmed around , crouching in the shade of the wings . If you caught their eye , they giggled , glanced away , then peeked to see if you were still looking . The ears of the youngest among them were pierced with conical wooden plugs as thick as a Magic Marker . Kayapo pierce their infants earlobes as a way of symbolically expanding a babys capacity to understand language and the social dimension of existence ; their phrase for stupid is ama kre ket , or no ear hole . The kids watched closely as we unloaded our gear , including some gifts for our hosts : fishhooks , tobacco , 22 pounds of high quality beads made in the Czech Republic . Barbara Zimmerman , the director of the Kayapo Project for the International Conservation Fund of Canada and the United Statesbased Environmental Defense Fund , introduced us to the village chief , Pukatire , a middle aged man wearing glasses , shorts , and flip flops . Akatemai , he said , shaking hands , and adding the bit of English hed picked up on a trip to North America : Hello ! How are you ? Kendjam looks timeless , but it was established only in 1998 , when Chief Pukatire and his followers split off from the village of Pukanu , farther up the Iriri River , after a dispute about logging . Fissioning , as anthropologists call it , is often the way Kayapo resolve disagreements or relieve the strain on resources in a particular area . The villages population is now 187 , and for all its classic appearance there are additions that would have boggled the minds of Pukatires ancestors : a generator in a government built nurses station ; a solar panel array enclosed in a barbed wire fence ; satellite dishes mounted on truncated palm trees . A few families have TVs in their thatch houses and enjoy watching videos of their own ceremonies , along with Brazilian soap operas . Pukatire showed us to a two room schoolhouse built a few years ago by the Brazilian government a pistachio colored concrete structure with a tile roof and shutters and the luxe marvel of a flush toilet fed by well water . We pitched our tents on the veranda . The heat of the day began to build , and a drowsy peace settled over the village , broken now and then by squabbling dogs and operatic roosters rehearsing for tomorrows sunrise . The ngobe , or mens house , was deserted . At the edge of the central plaza , or kapt , women sat in the shade of mango and palm trees , shelling nuts and cooking fish wrapped in leaves and buried in coals . Some headed out to the charred earth of their swidden gardens to tend crops of manioc , bananas , and sweet potatoes . A tortoise hunter returned from the forest , loudly singing in the Kayapo custom to announce his successful quest for the land turtles that are a vital part of the village diet . Toward evening the heat ebbed . A group of young warriors skirmished over a soccer ball . About 20 women with loops of colored beads around their necks and babies on their hips gathered in the kapt and began to march around in step , chanting songs . Boys with slingshots fired rocks at lapwings and swallows ; one stunned a white throated kingbird and clutched it in his hand the yellow breasted bird glaring defiantly like the peasant unafraid of the firing squad in the famous Goya painting . Families filtered down to the Iriri for their regular evening baths , but there were caimans in the river , and they did not linger as darkness fell . Eight degrees south of the Equator , the blood orange sun sank quickly . Howler monkeys roared over the dial tone drone of the cicadas , and earthy odors eddied onto the night air . At first glance , Kendjam seems a kind of Eden . And perhaps it is . But thats hardly to say the history of the Kayapo people is a pastoral idyll exempt from the persecution and disease that have ravaged nearly every indigenous tribe in North and South America . In 1900 , 11 years after the founding of the Brazilian Republic , the Kayapo population was about 4000 . As miners , loggers , rubber tappers , and ranchers poured into the Brazilian frontier , missionary organizations and government agencies launched efforts to pacify aboriginal tribes , wooing them with trade goods such as cloth , metal pots , machetes , and axes . Contact often had the unintended effect of introducing measles and other diseases to people who had no natural immunity . By the late 1970s , following the construction of the Trans Amazon Highway , the population had dwindled to about 1 ,300 . But if they were battered , they were never broken . In the 1980s and 90s the Kayapo rallied , led by a legendary generation of chiefs who harnessed their warrior culture to achieve their political goals . Leaders like Ropni and Mekaron Ti organized protests with military precision , began to apply pressure , and , as I learned from Zimmerman , who has been working with the Kayapo for more than 20 years , would even kill people caught trespassing on their land . Kayapo war parties evicted illegal ranchers and gold miners , sometimes offering them the choice of leaving Indian land in two hours or being killed on the spot . Warriors took control of strategic river crossings and patrolled borders ; they seized hostages ; they sent captured trespassers back to town without their clothes . In their struggle for autonomy and control over their land , the chiefs of that era learned Portuguese and were able to enlist the help of conservation organizations and celebrities such as the rock star Sting , who traveled with Chief Ropni ( also known as Raoni ) . In 1988 the Kayapo helped get indigenous rights written into the new Brazilian Constitution , and eventually they secured legal recognition of their territory . In 1989 they protested the construction of the Karara Dam project on the Xingu River , which would have flooded parts of their land . The original plan calling for six dams in the basin was dropped after large demonstrations in which conservation groups joined the Kayapo for what is known today as the Altamira Gathering . At the 1989 rally at Altamira , Kayapo leaders made a brilliant translation of the Kayapo warrior tradition to the tradition of the 20th century media spectacle , says anthropologist Stephan Schwartzman of the Environmental Defense Fund . They changed the terms of the discussion . The Kayapo population is now rapidly growing . From shotguns and motorized aluminum boats to Facebook pages , they have shown a canny ability to adopt technologies and practices of the cash based society at their borders without compromising the essence of their culture . With the help of noted anthropologist and Kayapo expert Terence Turner of Cornell University , they have embraced video cameras to record their ceremonies and dances and to log interactions with government officials . One small example of their ability to incorporate elements of the outside world into their culture is a pattern now fashionable with Kayapo bead workers : It is based on the logo of the Bank of Brazil . Much to the dismay of some conservationists , several village chiefs formed partnerships with gold mining companies in the 1980s and in the 1990s sold mahogany logging concessions alliances they came to regret and now have largely ended . Mostly the Kayapo learned to organize and to put aside their sometimes fractious relations to cultivate unity of purpose among themselves . As a result , they are perhaps the richest and most powerful of around 240 indigenous tribes remaining in Brazil . Their ceremonies , their kinship systems , their G language , and their knowledge of the forest and conception of the continuum between humans and the natural world are intact . What may be the most crucial of all , they have their land . The Kayapo arent entering the 21st century as a defeated people . They arent degrading themselves , Zimmerman told me . They havent lost a sense of who they are . At least for the moment . Its one thing to teach the skills and ceremonies of traditional culture ; its another to inspire a sense of why knowledge of how to make arrow tip poison ( from herbs and snake venom with beeswax as an adhesive ) or stack tortoises or stun fish using oxygen depriving timbo vines might be valuable to a generation beguiled by iPhones and the convenience of store bought food . Interest in traditional dress , beadwork , and ancestral practices is still strong in Kendjam , but its not uniform , and even if it were , the threats from outside are daunting . The Brazilian government is trying to pass laws saying indigenous people dont need to be consulted for their rivers to be used for electricity or mining or even if the boundaries of their lands need to be redrawn , said Adriano Pingo Jerozolimski , the director of a nonprofit Kayapo organization that represents about 22 Kayapo villages . Last June in the village of Kokraimoro , 400 Kayapo chiefs avowed their opposition to a raft of decrees , ordinances , and proposed laws and constitutional amendments that would gut their ability to control their land and prevent them , and any other indigenous group , from adding to their territory . The measures , which echo the dismal history of betrayal and dispossession in North America , are widely seen as part of a campaign to enable mining , logging , and agricultural interests to circumvent indigenous rights , now inconveniently guaranteed by the Brazilian Constitution . Among the many facets of this political struggle , perhaps the most wrenching at the moment is the effort to stop a project the Kayapo thought they had scotched more than two decades ago . The Karara project is back under a new name : the Belo Monte hydroelectric complex . On our second day in Kendjam we went down the Iriri River with two Kayapo marksmen : Okt , a 25 year old with three daughters and four sons ; and Meikre , a 38 year old with two boys and five girls . ( In Kayapo villages the division of labor falls along traditional lines . The men hunt and fish ; the women cook , garden , and gather fruits and nuts . ) Meikre wore yellow green beaded armbands and a long blue feather tied to a headband . We pulled away on two aluminum skiffs powered by Rabeta motors that enable shallow water travel during the dry season . In places the river was black and still as a midnight mirror ; in others it looked like tea flowing over the brown Brazilian shield rock , purling through gentle rapids or weaving among gardens of granitic Precambrian boulders . When we reached a wide , bay like stretch , Okt steered for an open area on the west side of the Iriri and cut the engine . We clambered ashore . Okt and Meikre slipped into the forest gracefully ; Meikre had a bow and arrows over his shoulders , Okt a shotgun . After five minutes of ducking and twisting and wriggling past a riot of thorny ferns and fallen limbs , stopping constantly to unhook myself from vines and to disabuse my adrenal glands of the conviction that venomous pit vipers lurked under every pile of leaves , I had no idea which way was east or west , no sense of where the river was , no hope of getting back to the boat on my own . We picked up a faint game trail . Meikre pointed to the scat of a collared peccary , a small wild swine , and then just off the trail , a trampled area where the peccary had slept . It was as obvious to Meikre as the meat department of a Stop & Shop would be to me . He and Okt darted ahead . Fifteen minutes later a shot rang out , then two more . When I caught up , a collared peccary lay dead on a bed of leaves . Meikre fashioned some twine from a swatch of bark and bound the animals feet . He cut another belt shaped length of bark and lashed it to the fore and hind legs . He slung the load over his shoulder , moving with 30 pounds of peccary on his back as if it were no heavier than a cashmere shawl . The Kayapo wed left behind had been busy fishing . First they had plugged the escape holes of a mole cricket nest in a sandbank and then had dug up and captured a batch of mole crickets , which they used to bait fishhooks and catch piranha . They chopped up the piranha on a mahogany canoe paddle and used the pieces as bait to catch peacock bass and piabanha . They started a tidy wood fire on the riverbank with Bic lighters and cooked the lunch on freshly whittled skewers . In midafternoon we motored on toward Kendjam against the light current . Meikre reclined in the bow , back propped against a mahogany paddle , feet up , hands laced behind his head , gazing out at the hypnotic water like a commuter heading home on the train after a long day . That night Chief Pukatire wandered over to our camp with a flashlight . The only things we need from the white culture are flip flops , flashlights , and glasses , he said amiably . I wondered if hed heard how skillfully Id negotiated the forest that afternoon , because he said he had a new name for me : Rop krore , the Kayapo word for spotted jaguar . He had a good humor about him ; you never would have guessed that two of his children had died of malaria not long after the founding of Kendjam . The village census lists the year of Pukatires birth as 1953 , and notes the names of his wife , their 38 year old daughter , and their three grandchildren . He said he was born near the town of Novo Progresso , west of Kendjam , in the time before contact . When Pukatires village was attacked by Kayapo from the village of Ba , his mother and his baby sister were killed ; Pukatire and his brother were taken away and raised in Ba . Pukatire was around 6 or 7 at the time , he said , and it was not until he was 12 or 13 that he was reunited with his father . We were happy . We cried , he said . Pukatire learned some Portuguese from missionaries and was recruited to help with the program of pacification by the Indian Protection Service , a forerunner of the National Indian Foundation , or FUNAI , the government agency that today represents the interests of Brazils aboriginal people . Before contact we were clubbing each other to death , and everybody lived in fear , he said . Without a doubt things are much better today because people arent hitting each other over the head with war clubs . But Pukatire sounded a lament I heard over and over : I am worried about our young people who are imitating whites , cutting their hair and wearing stupid little earrings like you see in town . None of the young people know how to make poison for arrows . In Braslia the Kayapo are always told they are going to lose their culture and they might as well get it over with . The elders have to speak up and say to our young people , You cant use the white mans stuff . Let the white people have their culture , we have ours . If we start copying white people too much , they wont be afraid of us , and they will come and take everything we have . But as long as we maintain our traditions , we will be different , and as long as we are different , they will be a little afraid of us . It was late ; Pukatire got up and said good night . Tomorrow would be a big day . The Kayapo leader Mekaron Ti and the great Ropni , whod traveled the world in defense of the forest decades ago , were coming to Kendjam to resume the battle against the dam that wouldnt die . After four decades of plans dating back to Brazils military dictatorship , four decades of studies , protests , revised plans , court rulings , court reversals , blockades , international appeals , a film by Avatar director James Cameron , and lawsuits , construction finally began in 2011 on the $14 billion Belo Monte . The complex of canals , reservoirs , dikes , and two dams is located some 300 miles north of Kendjam on the Xingu , where the river makes a giant U turn called the Volta Grande . The project , which will have a maximum generating capacity of 11 ,233 megawatts and is slated to come on line in 2015 , has divided the country . Its supporters defend it as a way of delivering needed electricity , while environmentalists have condemned it as a social , environmental , and financial disaster . In 2005 the Brazilian Congress voted to revive the dam on the grounds that its energy was essential to the security of the rapidly growing nation . The Kayapo and other tribes affected by the plans reassembled in Altamira in 2008 . A project engineer from Eletrobras , the state owned power company , was mobbed and suffered a deep , bloody gash on his shoulder , according to news accounts at the time . Claiming that the projects environmental impact statements were defective and that the regions indigenous people were not adequately consulted , Brazils federal Public Prosecutors Office filed a series of lawsuits to stop the complex , essentially pitting one branch of the government against another . The cases went to the countrys Supreme Court , but judgments have been deferred , and construction of Belo Monte has been allowed to proceed . Even a complex consisting of just two dams will have an enormous impact on the Xingu Basin , thanks to roads and the influx of an estimated 100000 workers and migrants . The dams will flood an area the size of Chicago . Official estimates project that 20000 people will be displaced ; independent estimates suggest the number may be twice as high . The dams will generate methane from inundated vegetation in quantities that rival the greenhouse gas emissions of coal fired power plants . The diversion of some 80 percent of the water along a 62 mile stretch of the Xingu will dry up areas that depend on seasonal floodwaters and are home to endangered species . The key now is what comes after this , says Schwartzman . The government has said only the Belo Monte project will be built , but the original proposal was for five other dams , and there are questions whether Belo Monte alone will be cost effective or whether the government will come back later and say we need to build these other dams . The morning of the great chiefs arrival in Kendjam , two dozen Kayapo women , bare breasted in black underwear and ropes of colored beads , went through what seemed like a dress rehearsal , chanting and marching around the kapt . Around 4 p .m . the sound of a plane drew a crowd to the airstrip . Ropni and Mekaron Ti disembarked with a third chief from the south named Yte i . Ropni is one of five elder Kayapo who still wear the lip disk a mahogany puck the size of a small pancake that extends the lower lip . He carried a wooden war club , shaped like a medieval sword . As he stood by the plane , a woman approached , held his hand , and began to sob . In a different culture bodyguards might have hustled her away , but Ropni seemed unfazed and in fact began sobbing as well . The anguished weeping was not the result of some fresh catastrophe but a form of ritual Kayapo mourning for departed mutual friends . That evening in the mens house , Ropni addressed the Kendjam villagers , vaulting across octaves with the glissading intonation of Kayapo speech . He stabbed the air with his hands and thumped his club : I dont like Kayapo imitating white culture . I dont like gold miners . I dont like loggers . I dont like the dam ! One of his purposes in coming to Kendjam was to find out why the chiefs of the eastern part of the territory had been accepting money from Eletrobras . Boxes of brand new 25 horsepower boat motors were stacked on the porch of the Protected Forest Association headquarters . Ropnis village and other villages in the south had steadfastly refused money from Eletrobras , money that activists said was an attempt to dampen indigenous opposition to Belo Monte . The consortium building the dam was investing in wells , clinics , and roads in the area and was paying a dozen villages nearby an allowance of 30000 reais a month ( roughly $15000 ) for food and supplies , which Schwartzman describes as hush money . The first Kayapo encounters with the grimy Brazilian banknotes led to the coining of their evocative word for money : pe o caprin , or sad leaves . More and more sad leaves were a part of Kayapo life , especially in villages close to towns on the Brazilian frontier . In the Kayapo village of Turedjam , near Tucum , pollution from clear cutting and cattle ranching had wrecked the fishing grounds , and it was not uncommon to see Kayapo shopping in supermarkets for soap and frozen chicken . For three nights Pukatire led Ropni and Mekaron Ti and Yte i to our camp , where they would sit on the schoolhouse veranda , lighting their pipes and drinking coffee and telling stories while vampire bats veered through the wan aura of a fluorescent bulb . In the old days men were men , Ropni said . They were raised to be warriors ; they werent afraid to die . They werent afraid to back up their words with action . They met guns with bows and arrows . A lot of Indians died , but a lot of whites died too . Thats what formed me : the warrior tradition . I have never been afraid to say what I believed . I have never felt humiliated in front of the whites . They need to respect us , but we need to respect them too . I still think that warrior tradition survives . The Kayapo will fight again if threatened , but I have counseled my people not to go looking for fights . He barked for more coffee , and then , seemingly agitated , took his cup to the edge of the veranda , away from the circle of schoolhouse chairs . For a long while , he stared into the darkness . On the day the chiefs left , there were letters they needed to sign FUNAI paperwork authorizing various matters they had discussed . Mekaron Ti , who was fluent in the Western world as well as the forest world , signed his name quickly like someone who had written a thousand letters . But Ropni held the pen awkwardly . It was striking to see him struggle with the letters of his name , knowing what esoteric expertise was otherwise in his hands , how deftly he could fasten a palm nut belt , or insert a lip plate , or whittle a stingray tail into an arrowhead , or underscore the oratory that had helped secure a future for his people . In the Xingu Valley there had hardly ever been a more able pair of hands . But in the realm that required penmanship , the great chief was like a child . Six months later , 26 eastern Kayapo leaders met in Tucum and signed a letter rejecting further money from the dambuilding consortium : We , the Mebengkre Kayapo people , have decided that we do not want a single penny of your dirty money . We do not accept Belo Monte or any other dam on the Xingu . Our river does not have a price , our fish that we eat does not have a price , and the happiness of our grandchildren does not have a price . We will never stop fighting ... The Xingu is our home and you are not welcome here . Somehow word had gotten out . The paleface with no holes in his ears was heading up Kendjam Mountain . It was 2 :30 in the afternoon , and before our hiking group was halfway down the airstrip , wed picked up a tail of kids , 15 or so , a cluster of teen and preteen girls and boys with painted faces carrying water in old soda bottles , and even one ebullient little fellow who couldnt have been more than four : barefoot and unsupervised with no parent hovering about to make sure he didnt get lost or eaten by a jaguar or poisoned by a pit viper or pierced by the thorns and spines on every other plant . He was wearing just a pair of shorts in contrast to me , in boots , hat , shirt , long pants , sunglasses , SPF three million sunblock , and three bandannas to mop up biblical torrents of sweat . We walked single file for a while , and then the kids rushed past , swarming around some tall shrubs ; they pulled the branches down and chopped off seedpods of the wild inga fruit . After 45 minutes the trail began to rise . The gray stone of the mountain loomed above : vertical walls , no fissures or obvious cracks . North , south , and west , its sides were seemingly unclimbable , but the eastern end sloped into the forest . The teenagers laughed and chattered up the steep grade , vaulting logs and swinging on vines . A narrow trail zigzagged up the side and cut through a cleft where you had to haul yourself with sweaty hands over a large boulder . A long ramp led up to the summit dome . All the kids were sitting on the summit , backlit by a milky blue sky . I wheezed up after them . Brown gray lizards scuttled around . The children scuttled around too , fearlessly flirting with the void where the rock fell precipitously for five or six hundred feet , maybe more . No handrails . No liability advisories . No adult supervision . The four year old boy capered at the edge of the abyss , laughing and exulting as if it was the most marvelous day of the year . When we all started down , he ran on ahead , and I found myself thinking about the night after the big chiefs had gone , when one of our guides , Djyti , came to visit , and we asked him a crucial question . Can you be a Kayapo and not live in the forest ? Djyti thought for a while , then shook his head and said no . Then , as if contemplating something unthinkable , he added : You are still a Kayapo , but you dont have your culture . In the past some anthropologists have fetishized cultural purity , fretting over the introduction of modern technology . But cultures evolve opportunistically like species the Plains Indians of North America picked up their iconic horses from the Spanish and strong traditional cultures will privilege themselves , making the accommodations they think will ensure their futures . We can question whether a man dressed in a parrot feather headdress and penis sheath is more valuable than one in a Batman T shirt and gym shorts . But who can be blind to their knowledge of forest plants and animals or to the preeminent values of clean water , untainted air , and the genetic and cultural treasure of diversity itself ? It is one of the richest ironies of the Amazon that the supposedly civilized outsiders who spent five centuries evangelizing , exploiting , and exterminating aboriginal people are now turning to those first inhabitants to save ecosystems recognized as critical to the health of the planet to defend essential tracts of undeveloped land from the developed worlds insatiable appetites . My four year old friend I never did learn his name had run all the way home long before I staggered back to the easy walking of the airstrip . It was nearly dark . Maybe his mom had plunked him in front of a TV to watch a video of a Kayapo ceremony or a Brazilian soap opera . And maybe to him the day was no great lark either , nothing memorably distinct from all the other days . Still , it seemed hard to imagine a more perfect life for a kid his age than to be a free and footloose Kayapo at home in the forest . Long may he run . The first face of the first Americans belongs to an unlucky teenage girl who fell to her death in a Yucatn cave some 12000 to 13000 years ago . Her bad luck is sciences good fortune . The story of her discovery begins in 2007 , when a team of Mexican divers led by Alberto Nava made a startling find : an immense submerged cavern they named Hoyo Negro , the black hole . At the bottom of the abyss their lights revealed a bed of prehistoric bones , including at least one nearly complete human skeleton . Nava reported the discovery to Mexicos National Institute of Anthropology and History , which brought together an international team of archaeologists and other researchers to investigate the cave and its contents . The skeleton affectionately dubbed Naia , after the water nymphs of Greek mythology turned out to be one of the oldest ever found in the Americas , and the earliest one intact enough to provide a foundation for a facial reconstruction . Geneticists were even able to extract a sample of DNA . Together these remnants may help explain an enduring mystery about the peopling of the Americas : If Native Americans are descendants of Asian trailblazers who migrated into the Americas toward the end of the last ice age , why dont they look like their ancient ancestors ? By all appearances , the earliest Americans were a rough bunch . If you look at the skeletal remains of Paleo Americans , more than half the men have injuries caused by violence , and four out of ten have skull fractures . The wounds dont appear to have been the result of hunting mishaps , and they dont bear telltale signs of warfare , like blows suffered while fleeing an attacker . Instead it appears that these men fought among themselves often and violently . The women dont have these kinds of injuries , but theyre much smaller than the men , with signs of malnourishment and domestic abuse . To archaeologist Jim Chatters , co leader of the Hoyo Negro research team , these are all indications that the earliest Americans were what he calls Northern Hemisphere wild type populations : bold and aggressive , with hypermasculine males and diminutive , subordinate females . And this , he thinks , is why the earliest Americans facial features look so different from those of later Native Americans . These were risk taking pioneers , and the toughest men were taking the spoils and winning fights over women . As a result , their robust traits and features were being selected over the softer and more domestic ones evident in later , more settled populations . Chatterss wild type hypothesis is speculative , but his teams findings at Hoyo Negro are not . Naia has the facial features typical of the earliest Americans as well as the genetic signatures common to modern Native Americans . This signals that the two groups dont look different because the earliest populations were replaced by later groups migrating from Asia , as some anthropologists have asserted . Instead they look different because the first Americans changed after they got here . Chatterss research is just one interesting development in a field of study that has been exploding in fresh directions over the past two decades . New archaeological finds , novel hypotheses , and a trove of genetic data have shed fresh light on who the first Americans were and on how they might have come to the Western Hemisphere . But for all the forward motion , whats clearest is that the story of the first Americans is still very much a mystery . For most of the 20th century it was assumed that the mystery had been more or less solved . In 1908 a cowboy in Folsom , New Mexico , found the remains of an extinct subspecies of giant bison that had roamed the area more than 10000 years ago . Later , museum researchers discovered spearpoints among the bones clear evidence that people had been present in North America much earlier than previously believed . Not long after , spearpoints dating to 13000 years ago were found near Clovis , New Mexico , and what became known as Clovis points were subsequently found at dozens of sites across North America where ancient hunters had killed game . Given that Asia and North America were connected by a broad landmass called Beringia during the last ice age and that the first Americans appeared to be mobile big game hunters , it was easy to conclude that theyd followed mammoths and other prey out of Asia , across Beringia , and then south through an open corridor between two massive Canadian ice sheets . And given that there was no convincing evidence for human occupation predating the Clovis hunters , a new orthodoxy developed : They had been the first Americans . Case closed . That all changed in 1997 when a team of high profile archaeologists visited a site in southern Chile called Monte Verde . There Tom Dillehay of Vanderbilt University claimed to have discovered evidence of human occupation dating to more than 14000 years ago a thousand years before the Clovis hunters appeared in North America . Like all pre Clovis claims , this one was controversial , and Dillehay was even accused of planting artifacts and fabricating data . But after reviewing the evidence , the expert team concluded it was solid , and the story of the peopling of the Americas was thrown wide open . How did people get all the way to Chile before the ice sheets in Canada retreated enough to allow an overland passage ? Did they come during an earlier period of the Ice Age , when this inland corridor was ice free ? Or did they come down the Pacific coast by boat , the same way humans got to Australia some 50000 years ago ? Suddenly the field was awash in new questions and invigorated by a fresh quest for answers . In the 18 years since the Monte Verde bombshell dropped , none of these questions have been resolved . But the original question ; was Clovis first , has been answered repeatedly , with several sites in North America making their own claims to pre Clovis occupation . Some of these places have been known and studied for years and have gained fresh credibility in the wake of Monte Verdes acceptance , but there have been new finds as well . One location in particular , the Debra L . Friedkin site in central Texas , might even be the earliest place of demonstrable human habitation in the Western Hemisphere . In 2011 archaeologist Michael Waters of Texas A&M University announced that he and his team had unearthed evidence of extensive human occupation dating to as early as 15 ,500 years ago some 2 ,500 years before the first Clovis hunters arrived . The Friedkin site lies in a small valley in the hill country about an hour north of Austin , where a tiny perennial stream now called Buttermilk Creek , along with some shade trees and a seam of chert , a type of rock useful for toolmaking , made the area an attractive place for people to live for thousands of years . There was something unique about this valley , Waters says . It was long thought that the earliest Americans were primarily big game hunters , following mammoths and mastodons across the continent , but this valley was an ideal place for hunter gatherers . People here would have eaten nuts and roots , crawdads and turtles , and they would have hunted animals such as deer and turkeys and squirrels . In other words , people probably werent here on their way to somewhere else ; they were here to live . But if Waters is right that people were settled here , in the middle of the continent , as early as 15 ,500 years ago , when did the first arrivals cross into the New World from Asia ? Thats unclear , but it appears that people may have been settled in other parts of the continent at the same time . Waters says the pre Clovis artifacts hes found at Buttermilk Creek more than 16000 of them , including stone blades , spearpoints , and chips resemble artifacts found at sites in Virginia , Pennsylvania , and Wisconsin . Theres a pattern here , he says . I think the data clearly show that people were in North America 16000 years ago . Time will tell if that represents the initial occupation of the Americas or if there was something earlier . Either way , the newest archaeological evidence comports with an increasingly important line of evidence in our understanding of the peopling of the Americas . In recent years geneticists have compared the DNA of modern Native Americans with that of other populations around the world and concluded that the ancestors of Native Americans were Asians who separated from other Asian populations and remained isolated for about 10000 years , based on mutation rates in human DNA . During that time they developed unique genetic signatures that only Native Americans currently possess . These genetic markers have been found not only in the DNA recovered from Naias skeleton but also in the remains of a child buried some 12 ,600 years ago in western Montana , on a piece of land now called the Anzick site . Last year Danish geneticist Eske Willerslev reported that an analysis of the childs remains had yielded , for the first time , a full Paleo American genome . Now weve got two specimens , Anzick and Hoyo Negro , both from a common ancestor who came from Asia , Waters says . And like Hoyo Negro , the Anzick genome unquestionably shows that Paleo Americans are genetically related to native peoples . Though some critics point out that two individuals are too small a sample to draw definitive conclusions , theres strong consensus on the Asian ancestry of the first Americans . So how and when did the earliest inhabitants of the New World get here ? That remains an open question , but given that people made it all the way to southern Chile more than 14000 years ago , it would be surprising if they hadnt journeyed by boat . The Channel Islands off the southern California coast are rugged and wild , home to a national park , a national marine sanctuary , and a training post for US Navy SEALs . The archipelago also harbors thousands of archaeological sites , most of them still undisturbed . In 1959 , while exploring Santa Rosa Island , museum curator Phil Orr discovered a few bones of a human he named Arlington Springs man . At the time , the bones were judged to be 10000 years old , but 40 years later researchers using improved dating techniques fixed the age at 13000 years among the oldest human remains ever discovered in the Americas . Thirteen thousand years ago the northern Channel Islands then fused into a single island were separated from the mainland by five miles of open water . Clearly Arlington Springs man and his fellow islanders had boats capable of offshore travel . Jon Erlandson of the University of Oregon has been excavating sites on these islands for three decades . He hasnt found anything as old as Arlington Springs man , but he has found strong evidence that people who lived here slightly later , some 12000 years ago , had a well developed maritime culture , with points and blades that resemble older tools found on the Japanese islands and elsewhere on the Asian Pacific coast . Erlandson says that the Channel Island inhabitants might have descended from people who traveled what he calls a kelp highway a relatively continuous kelp bed ecosystem flush with fish and marine mammals from Asia to the Americas , perhaps with a long stopover in Beringia . We know there were maritime peoples using boats in Japan 25000 to 30000 years ago . So I think you can make a logical argument that they may have continued northward , following the Pacific Rim to the Americas . Beaches along the Pacific coast still teem with elephant seals and sea lions , and its easy to imagine hunters in small boats moving swiftly down the coastline , feasting on the abundant meat . But imagination is no substitute for hard evidence , and as yet there is none . Sea levels are 300 to 400 feet higher than at the end of the last glacial maximum , which means that ancient coastal sites could lie under hundreds of feet of water and miles from the current shoreline . Perhaps ironically , the best evidence for a coastal migration might be found inland , as people traveling along the coast would likely have explored rivers and inlets along the way . There is already suggestive evidence of this in central Oregon , where projectiles resembling points found in Japan and on the Korean Peninsula and Russias Sakhalin Island have been discovered in a series of caves , along with what is surely the most indelicate evidence of pre Clovis occupation in North America : fossilized human feces . In 2008 Dennis Jenkins of the University of Oregon reported that hed found human coprolites , the precise term for ancient excrement , dating to 14000 to 15000 years old in a series of shallow caves overlooking an ancient lake bed near the town of Paisley . DNA tests have identified the Paisley Caves coprolites as human , and Jenkins speculates that the people who left them might have made their way inland from the Pacific by way of the Columbia or Klamath Rivers . Whats more , Jenkins points to a clue in the coprolites : seeds of desert parsley , a tiny plant with an edible root hidden a foot underground . You have to know that root is down there , and you have to have a digging stick to get it , Jenkins says . That implies to me that these people didnt just arrive here . In other words , whoever lived here wasnt just passing through ; they knew this land and its resources intimately . That seems to be an emerging theme . It appears to be the story not just at Paisley Caves but at Monte Verde and the Friedkin site in Texas as well . In each of these cases people seemed to have been settled in , comfortable with their environment and adept at exploiting it . And this suggests that long before the Clovis culture began spreading across North America , the Americas hosted diverse communities of people people who may have arrived in any number of migrations by any number of routes . Some may have come by sea , others by land . Some may have come in such small numbers that traces of their existence will never be found . Theres a whole lot of stuff that we dont know and may never know , says David Meltzer , an archaeologist at Southern Methodist University . But were finding new ways to find things and new ways to find things out . Noon in the United Arab Emirates is four in the afternoon in the Philippines , which means that Teresa Cruz 's two older children are supposed to be home from school and back inside the apartment of their aunt , who is raising them . Teresa lives in Dubai , the UAE 's most populous city , 4300 miles from the Philippines . She 's a 39 year old sales clerk at a clothing store in one wing of a shining multistory Dubai mall . Her job requires her to straighten clothes , ring up transactions , keep track of receipts , and smile whenever a customer walks in . She 's on her feet six days a week , Fridays off . So Friday midday is a scheduled time for Teresa to see her 11 year old daughter and 8 year old son , and because she 's an overseas worker one of many millions of adults who have traveled thousands of miles from home to take jobs that allow them to send money back to their families she does this in the overseas worker 's modern way : She pulls a low , plastic stool up to a computer set into a particleboard desk inside the bedroom she shares with four other people . She logs on to Facebook . She clicks a video chat button , leans in close , and waits . The first time I waited with her , Teresa was still in her pajamas and fuzzy eared slippers at midday . She lives in the bedroom with her husband , Luis , who like Teresa left the Philippines years ago ; their two youngest children , a baby and a three year old ; and whomever the couple has persuaded to babysit while Teresa and Luis are at work . ( Names have been changed to shield the family from potential repercussions . ) This month it was a young Filipina who had run away from her job as an Emirati family 's ill treated maid and was now illicitly residing in a metal bunk wedged between the Cruz family mattress and the bedroom door . The baby was teething and cranky , and Teresa shushed him as she clasped him to one hip , her eyes fixed on the computer . Finally a face materialized on the screen . But it was her sister , the children 's aunt . The kids werent home yet , she said . She didnt know where they were . Call after dinner , she said in Tagalog , and signed off . Teresa 's shoulders sagged . She switched to her daughter 's Facebook page , where she was startled to read , In a relationship . She stared at the screen . Maybe she doesnt mean it , Teresa said . Justin Bieber was on her daughter 's likes list , as was the television show Glee . As was a Facebook page with many followers who have one attribute in common : Someone in the family has decided that the only way to accomplish the things a responsible parent is supposed to pay for schoolbooks , make sure the grandparents have enough to eat , prepare the children for college someday is to leave family behind and find work a very long way away . During the weeks I came to know her in Dubai , I saw Teresa lose her composure only once . She was talking about an evening in the Philippines more than a decade ago , when she stood outside her family 's home and saw that every house on the street had Christmas lights , every single one except hers . For us , she said , nothing . Her face suddenly crumpled , and she began to cry . I had heard a lot about Abroad ,  Teresa told me . I had heard that when you were in Abroad , you can buy anything . Abroad was like a country of its own , the place from which impressive things emanated : gold bracelets , Colgate toothpaste , corned beef in cans . In the municipality where Teresa and her ten siblings grew up , an hour from Manila , houses of stone were made with Abroad money . Our house was wood and very old , Teresa said . One monsoon season , in the room where Teresa and her sister slept , a sodden wall collapsed . Then when it 's Christmastime , she said , I was in front of my house . And I said , the first salary , I will buy a Christmas light .  The first salary was from a local job selling sporty shoes . Teresa , just out of high school , could not afford to replace the house 's wooden walls with sturdier stone . But she could buy a string of colored lights . She nailed them up on her house in the shape of a Christmas tree . I did it myself , she said . And I went out in front , and the light was there , and I said , I can do this . That was the night that Teresa decided she was tough enough for Abroad . Migration for better opportunity is as old as human history , but today it 's likely that more people are living outside their countries of birth than ever before . At every hour of every day masses of people and money are in motion , a global flux as complex and shifting as weather , with nations of fewer resources off loading their ambitious working poor and relying on the money that comes back in their place . Remittances is what economists call these person to family transfers , whisked home by electronic banking services or hand delivered by couriers . Tiny in individual increments , aggregate remittances now constitute massive flows of capital into the world 's developing countries . Of the many places from which this money is sent the richest countries , where employers are willing to put needy foreigners to work the United States tops the list . No other city on Earth , though , packs 21st century international workers into one showy space quite like Dubai . Arrive in the standard manner , disembarking into the sprawling international airport , and you will pass a hundred remittance workers like Teresa and Luis before you reach the curbside cabstand . The young woman pouring Starbucks espressos is from the Philippines , or maybe Nigeria . The restroom cleaner is from Nepal , or maybe Sudan . The cabdriver , gunning it up the freeway toward downtown Dubai , is from northern Pakistan or Sri Lanka or the southern Indian state of Kerala . And the mad looking , postmodernist skyscrapers outside the taxi windows? This building , the one like a massive hatchet blade , or the one that resembles a giant golf ball atop a 20 story pancake stack? All built by foreign laborers South Asian men primarily , from India , Nepal , Pakistan , and Bangladesh . If it 's daylight , empty buses will be parked in the shade beneath the skeletons of the skyscrapers still under construction . Theyre waiting to carry men back at dusk to group housing units , crowded as prison barracks , where most of them are required to live . Difficult living conditions for foreign workers can be found everywhere in the world . But everything about Dubai is exaggerated . The city 's modern history starts just over a half century ago , with the discovery of oil in nearby Abu Dhabi , then a separate and independent sheikhdom . The United Arab Emirates was founded in 1971 as a national federation encompassing six of these sheikhdoms the seventh joined the following year and since Dubai had comparatively little oil , the city 's royal family used its portion of the country 's new riches to transform the small trading city into a commercial capital to dazzle the world . The famous indoor ski slope is only one wing of a Dubai shopping mall , which is not even the biggest of the city 's many malls ; that one contains a three story aquarium and a full size ice hockey rink . The tallest building on the planet is in Dubai ; Tom Cruise was seen rappelling down its outer wall in one of the Mission : Impossible movies . Nearly everywhere the visitor looks , things are extravagant and new . And because the men who conceived contemporary Dubai decided that their spectacular city would be assembled and serviced by workers from other countries there were too few Emiratis to do it , and why would a newly wealthy nation expect its adults to wait tables or pour cement in 120 degree Fahrenheit heat when it could afford to invite outsiders to perform these tasks? they ended up doing this in exaggerated fashion too . Of the 2 .1 million people in Dubai , only about one in ten is Emirati . The rest are the global economy 's loaners , working on temporary contracts with the understanding that they will never be offered Emirati citizenship . The society they live in , like most of the gulf countries now relying on foreign workers , is as rigidly layered as was 19th century industrial America , and in many of the same ways : by race , gender , class , country of origin , English language fluency . In Dubai the professionals and managers are largely Europeans , Americans , Australians , New Zealanders , and Canadians white people who mostly make too much money to be thought of as remittance workers . Their salaries let them bring over their families , drive Range Rovers , and move into elegant high rises or landscaped villas . It is remittance workers who cook for them too and look after their children , who clean the streets , staff the shopping malls , fill out the pharmacy prescriptions , run the hockey rink Zambonis , and build the skyscrapers in the scorching sun outside who make Dubai function , in other words , while sending their wages a long way home . At its heart , however , this isnt a story about work and wages and GDP . It 's a love story : about family bonds , colliding duties and loyalties , and the immense barriers to providing for loved ones material and emotional needs in a global economy that sometimes seems perfectly structured to pull families apart . Most overseas workers are caught up in love stories of one kind or another , and in Dubai , which has one of the world 's highest concentrations of foreign workers , the Cruzes appreciate the aspect of their daily lives that renders them unusually lucky : They are able to live together , husband and wife , in the same physical place . For a time they were together with all their children , a rare blessing for remittance workers . But the arrival of the fourth baby the Cruzes are observant Roman Catholics was more than they could manage . It was Luis , who had been married before and already had one child in the Philippines , who took the older children home . Whenever I asked Teresa about losing physical contact with her daughter and her oldest son , she went expressionless and still . Very difficult , she said . And : I think they have a good family with my sister . And : There they will learn to be Filipino . Inside the city 's block long St . Mary 's Catholic Church the Friday afternoon mass is delivered in Tagalog . English masses are at other times of the week , as are the Sinhalese , the French , the Tamil , the Arabic , the Malayalam and Konkani . Those last two are languages of India . One Friday the pews overflowed with parishioners , and standing just outside St . Mary 's doors , alongside others who had arrived too late for a seat , Teresa and Luis kept an eye on their wandering three year old while listening to the loudspeaker voice of Tomasito Veneracion , the priest who ministers to the congregation 's Filipinos . Hed recently learned a new word , Father Tom was saying in Tagalog : gamophobia , the fear of remaining in a committed relationship . You must not be gamophobic , Father Tom preached . You must not allow yourself to say that the overseas worker 's family is strong but that you , the actual overseas worker , are weak . Teresa and Luis exchanged glances ; the priest was making no direct reference to adultery , but they understood what he meant . Nearly every Filipino in the U .A .E . has friends or relatives in the Philippines and in the gulf who manage long distance marriages by taking lovers while the remittances flow . Dont forget the people you left behind , Father Tom said . Dont forget the reason youre here . In a city of foreign workers these are the stories that predominate : the reasons youre here , the people you left behind . Frequently they turn out to be one and the same . My daughters , my husband , my parents , and my brother , who is still in the village and who I am now afraid is using drugs . Because I wanted that brother to go to high school . Because although we are eight men in a room meant for four and must soak our filthy work clothes in soapy buckets to remove the smell , the employer pays for my lodgings , leaving me more to send back . Because even though my employer does not pay for my lodgings , I can lower my rent by sharing not only a room but also a bunk , day shift men and night shift men taking turns lying down to sleep . Because my wife was pregnant and we were afraid for our baby 's future , and now , by the way , I keep my wife 's picture inside my suitcase , not on the bunkside wall , where the other men in my room might look at her while having private thoughts . Because this is the way my own father taught me to provide when he left us , 30 years ago , to quadruple his wages and send the money home . In Manila there are blocks in which nearly every storefront window is plastered with inducements to leave . KINGDOM OF SAUDI ARABIA , 30 Sandwich Makers . HONG KONG , 150 Domestic Helpers . DUBAI , Play Area Attendant , Vegetable Packers . Tile Setter , Rice Specialist , Janitress ( Good Looking ) , Ice/Fruit Carvers . Job offers luring Filipinos away name destinations all over the world . But the most prominent ads promise work in the Gulf states , especially for the minimally educated . When Luis was a small boy , his father took just such a job , signing on as a welder in Dubai . He never moved back ; Luis senior now returns home only on occasional leave , when he rejoins the woman to whom he is still married Philippine law does not permit divorce . Luis and his four siblings grew up accustomed to their father 's absence , and they hated it . We would all take him back to the airport , Luis told me . Everybody would have to hug and kiss him . That was the worst part . Everybody would cry . Like many nations with persistent poverty , the Philippines has come to depend on these regular departures . A formal acronym is used , often accompanied by praise for heroic sacrifice to nation and family : OFWs , or overseas Filipino workers . A special OFW center takes up part of Manila 's international airport , and multiple public agencies attend to their needs around the country the Philippines Overseas Employment Administration , for example , and the Overseas Workers Welfare Administration , each with hundreds of employees . By the time Luis was 22 , he was married , with a child of his own , living in the gritty Philippine city in which he had been raised , south of Manila . He worked construction , making four dollars a day . It was enough to survive . But it was not enough to provide , not the way his father had . In Tagalog there 's a phrase , katas ng Saudi , that means the juice extracted from Saudi . It was the title of a popular 2007 movie about the travails of a Filipino worker returning from Saudi Arabia , and Filipinos still use it to describe the bounty made possible by money from Abroad the good shoes , the collapse resistant walls even when these things are technically katas ng Dubai or katas ng Qatar . The Cruz family compound , entered through a narrow passageway off a bustling commercial street that borders the water , is now a rich warren of katas ng Saudi : upholstered couches , spacious rooms , a DVD player in a polished bookcase , covered decks overlooking a cousin 's permanent underwater fishnets . Two of Luis 's sisters have gone to college . One is training to become a dentist . It was Luis senior , studying his son 's circumstances on a home visit and observing that the young man 's first wife appeared to be losing interest in the marriage , who suggested his son find a better paying job in Dubai . He knew my situation , Luis said . And my mother took me to the recruitment agency . Luis still remembers the first sum he sent back to the Philippines , after a few weeks work in Dubai : $350 , almost three months wages under his old rate . He sent money straight to his mother , to support her , his daughter , and his sisters . He found he could earn more by working straight through the week , taking no rest days . His first job involved using a blowtorch in the desert . You cant hold your own hat without gloves , he recalled . It 's too hot . He was desperately lonely . But he was making very good money . He had his father for company . After a while his younger brother Tomas , who was also married , gave up on the Philippines and came to Dubai too , leaving his own wife and a daughter behind . Still , this is a love story , and it 's sort of a happy one , as remittance worker chronicles go . While Luis was working in the gulf , Teresa aced the Manila hiring agency interviews . In Dubai , arriving at the malls to which she was first dispatched , she caught glimpses of hazy outdoor construction sites that helped keep her from feeling sorry for herself . She had air conditioning at work and during her initial months , two to a room ladies housing , a special perk for many new female remittance workers . The dormitory was the nicest sleeping quarters shed ever had . She was glad not to be trapped in the lonesome exile of a domestic helper . Filipinas , with their good English and their reputation for kindness and reliability , are in high demand as caretakers , and not just in the Gulf states ; nearly half the remittance workers who leave the Philippines are women , often pulled away from their own families by the international demand for nannies , nurses , and assistants for the elderly . But Teresa had heard enough stories about domestics lives overseas to know this was not for her . The lucky ones landed humane employers who treated them respectfully , but too often the accounts were grim : no time off , unyielding isolation , verbal abuse from the women in the household , sexual abuse from the men . Teresa had her own cell phone too another story often told about domestics is that employers confiscate phones to keep women more attentive and dependent . Every time she went to an exchange house for the gratifying transaction that made her Emirates wages reappear at home as Philippine pesos , she held back enough to buy food and other necessities , and eventually , on a few celebratory occasions , a little gold jewelry . And because so many Filipinos of both genders wind up working in Dubai , Teresa found compatible friends , young people who , like her , had upgraded from worker dorms to jammed but congenial co ed apartments . Romance was possible . It was messy romance , to be sure ; most of the men were still legally bound to the people on whose behalf they had left . When Teresa met Luis at a birthday party , he was still married . But he was handsome and tall , with a sweet smile and hair that fell into his eyes , and even though no divorce is permitted at home , there is annulment , for the determined . ( When I asked Father Tom how many annulment requests he receives at St . Mary 's , he sighed deeply . I tell you , this is like a factory , he said . ) So it was that Teresa , four time zones from home so that her family might have a house that would stand up to rain , married a man who could tell her exactly what it felt like to see his own father only once every two years . But he was adaptable and tough , as was she , and now he has secured work indoors , at the industrial plant where he had been a welder . He likes to cook , which both delights and embarrasses Teresa , since she is not much of a chef herself , and he knows which stores carry pork products , in special alcoves marked off for non Muslims , as well as green mango and dried shrimp . At work , moving quietly about the store aisles , Teresa has learned to spot unhappy Filipina domestics , minding other people 's children while their imperious lady employers walk ahead examining clothes . Sometimes , risking much , she makes a whispered approach in Tagalog behind the employer 's back : Hi , kabayan . Hi , homeland friend . Are you all right? Is your job so difficult? Why dont you go home? They say , I cant . My family needs .  Needs what , a less astute listener might wonder , and needs it more than your family needs you? But all remittance workers know that need is complicated and has ways of metastasizing . Food , schooling , medicine , and collapse resistant walls are things families need ; so is pride . The rebuilding of the family house is not a project to be stopped halfway through . A child placed in a costlier school at home will need tuition for years to come ; a satisfactorily betrothed daughter or sister will next need money ( and likely a dowry , if she is from India ) for a proper wedding . In both Dubai and the Philippines I heard laments about spiraling cycles of expectation and dependency , the possessions that materialize as substitutes for the absent parent , the assumption that the overseas worker is a cash dispenser that cannot be unplugged . Once , traveling with friends near Luis 's home in the Philippines , I met an acquaintance of theirs who was on leave from his job in Najran , Saudi Arabia a sweaty , monotonous restaurant kitchen job , where hardly anybody ever spoke to him except to shout orders . When I asked how it felt to rejoin his wife for a while , he shook his head . Every week I am here means money is not coming , he said . She wants me to go back . Journalists and human rights groups periodically document remittance workers grievances : unpaid wages , dangerous work sites , wretched living conditions , passports illegally confiscated . But the UAE does not make that documentation easy . Some nongovernmental organizations are banned from working in the country , and the national press treads carefully to avoid offending Emirati officials , who are quick to snuff out any form of organized complaint . The UAE 's defenders point out that it remains among the most welcoming of the Gulf states ; women dress as they wish , non Islamic houses of worship thrive , and the streets are safe for tourists and residents alike . All global cities have problems like this , retired Emirati political science professor Abdulkhaleq Abdulla told me . All global cities are built on foreign workers and cheap labor . Dubai embodies the best and worst of globalization the best because this is a very tolerant city , a very liberal and open city . But this city has a lot of misery in it and a lot of poor and a lot of exploitation . So which glasses do you want to wear? Optimistic or pessimistic? I tend to look at it from both sides . The UAE 's surest leverage for keeping its contracted workforce compliant is the threat of deportation : Stir up trouble here , ungrateful guest worker , and we will ship you right back to the less lucrative life you left at home . That is true of every labor importing country in the world , including the United States , and in both Dubai and the Philippines people kept reminding me that remittance workers go abroad because they decide to because they have weighed carefully their own possibilities , as they understand them , and the ways they might contribute most to the people they love . Picture this , at the Manila airport : A crowded reception terminal , scores of people just outside customs , all pressing and shoving for a glimpse of the first returning passengers to emerge . This was about 13 years ago , Teresa 's initial visit home after a three year absence . When she recognized one of her brothers and then another , and then a sister and some nephews , she was startled : Every one of the relatives whod shrugged her off when shed left the Philippines had crammed into borrowed cars to welcome her home . Atop the luggage cart she pushed toward them was a hefty cardboard box containing a new color television a big one . At home we had a small black and white , Teresa told me . But I said , I want to buy a 25 inch TV . I saw in their faces how happy they are to have this TV . Even now if there is no one watching , the TV is on . The room in which the television stands the sala , the big family room has over the years been wholly reinforced . The construction was done bit by bit ; Teresa 's parents would tell her about it in long distance conversations , how every few months a little more of the money Teresa wired was being funneled into repair . First the sala . Then the kitchen . Then the sleeping area , with the old bamboo mats on the floor . Slowly by slowly , Teresa said , they made it stones . In Tagalog there 's a popular song about a remittance worker , recorded a quarter century ago by Roel Cortez , called Napakasakit Kuya Eddie . Teresa darted to her computer to call up YouTube when I told her Id never heard it . On the screen appeared the silhouette of a small boat lashed to a buoy in a golden sea . Ill translate , Teresa said . Music swelled . The lyrics scrolled . Im here in the middle of Arab country and working so hard , Teresa said , as Cortez 's rich voice rose . In the very hot place  the hand will become hard , and your color become dark . She was absorbed , singing and translating , working to catch up in English . When he sleeps , he is always thinking to become past the time , so that he can go back home , she said . And he 's so glad that his son write him a letter , but he become shocked , and his tears come out Dad! You go home , and make it fast! Mommy has another man!  By the last verse the song 's narrator has returned to the Philippines to find his two children smoking marijuana and his wife having produced a third child , not his . It 's so difficult , brother Eddie , Teresa sang loudly , jouncing her own teething baby on her knee . What happened to my life? The baby had quieted , and Teresa passed him up to Luis . The three year old was sprawled on the family mattress , drowsily watching cartoons from the Filipino satellite station . In a few years , when theyre too big for that mattress , theyll go to the Philippines too . The Cruzes possess amazing communication devices that workers of their parents generation did not have , of course : cell phones with instant messaging , Facebook , apps of international reach , and the computer near which Teresa and Luis now hovered , waiting , the baby in Luis 's arms . But on this Friday afternoon , as the Cruzes daughter and big son finally appeared in a video window , mashed together on a couch and merrily punching each other in the arm , it seemed to me that it must have been a special comfort to their parents , amid all the laughing and pointing and waving , to have with them in their crowded quarters two small , needy bodies still close enough to embrace . Do you mind if I look around? Alex asks the villagers . Were standing with a group of fishermen in front of a small mosque in northern Oman . A row of whitewashed buildings lines the pebbly beach . Behind the village rises a sheer 3 ,000 foot cliff that shimmers under a blistering midday sun . You can do as you please , says Taha Abdullah Saif Althouri , speaking for the group . There are no roads in the village , which lies at the head of a deep fjordlike waterway on the remote Musandam Peninsula . The only way to get here is by boat , which is how we arrived . Jutting deep into the world 's busiest oil shipping channel , the peninsula lies only 24 miles from Iran and is one of the most strategic military locations in the world . Yet for centuries the peninsula was inaccessible , little known , and seldom visited by outsiders . The sultanate created a Ministry of Tourism in 2004 hoping to stimulate the economy , but so far it has had little effect in the region . As Alex wanders off , we explain to the fishermen that were professional rock climbers on an exploratory visit . The men , dressed in white and tan dishdashas , puff on their pipes and nod . The mountainous peninsula on which they live is an intricate maze of bays and fjords , called khors . Few climbers have ever touched its sheer limestone cliffs . We had learned of the area 's potential from some British climbers who visited in 2005 . There are six of us on our team , including two of the best young climbers in the world , Alex Honnold and Hazel Findlay . Alex , a 28 year old from Sacramento , California , made headlines in 2008 when he scaled the 2 ,000 foot northwest face of Half Dome in Yosemite without a rope . Hazel , 24 , who grew up climbing in Wales , in 2011 became the first British woman to free climb the 3 ,000 foot wall on Yosemite 's El Capitan . Taha tells us that this village , known as Sibi , is home to about a dozen families that all share the same last name , Althouri . Besides fishing , they make their living primarily as goat herders . Suddenly one of the men stops in his tracks , points up at the towering cliff , and starts shouting . A thousand feet above us Alex is climbing , antlike , up the rock wall . The Althouris are beside themselves . What are they saying? I ask our translator . It 's hard to explain , he replies . But essentially , they think Alex is a witch . I can understand why . Even for me , Alex 's skills are hard to grasp . But so is this landscape : In 28 years of climbing Ive never seen rock formations as magical . In places the land rises straight from the ocean in knife edged fins . Proximity to the sea makes these cliffs perfect for deepwater soloing , a specialized type of climbing in which you push as far up a wall as you can , then simply tumble into the water . It sounds harmless enough , but an out of control fall can cause serious injury and even death . Weve rented a 44 foot catamaran to serve as our mobile base camp . Besides Alex and Hazel , our team includes photographer Jimmy Chin , filmmaker Renan Ozturk , and rigger Mikey Schaefer . One of the places we thought would be perfect for visiting by boat is As Salamah , an uninhabited island in the Strait of Hormuz . It 's too close to Iran , says our guide , Abdullah Said al Busaidi , a veteran police officer from Muscat , Oman 's capital . Peering through the thick haze , we see the hulking outlines of oil tankers in the strait . Nearby , dozens of speedboats cut back and forth , their decks piled high with crates . Smugglers , Abdullah says . UN sanctions against Iran have created shortages of goods such as cigarettes , refrigerators , and flat screen TVs , as well as supplies of food and medicine . With Khasab , the region 's largest town , as little as an hour by speedboat from Iran , and 123 miles by highway from Dubai , a black market thrives here . We cant catch them all , Abdullah says , as an Iranian speedboat roars past . We arrive at the island in early afternoon . As Salamah , we discover , is nothing more than a giant rock rising from the sea , and there is nowhere to anchor . So we drop the sails and use the catamaran 's twin engines to park the boat just offshore . Wasting no time , Alex and Hazel lace up their climbing shoes , dive from the boat , and swim to a cliff where the ocean has carved out a cavern with an overarching 15 foot roof . Within minutes Alex has reached the cavern 's ceiling , where he finds a series of tiny holds along a protruding rib of dark gray limestone . It 's exactly the kind of challenge he and Hazel have been looking for , with every move more difficult than the one before . Hanging upside down , holding on to bumps in the rock no bigger than matchboxes , Alex hooks the heels of his sticky soled shoes over a small protrusion . Defying gravity , he lets go with one hand and snatches for the next hold , reaching a spot about halfway across the roof . There the rock becomes too slick for a heel hook , so , with Hazel cheering him on , Alex dangles his legs and swings like a chimp from one tiny edge to the next . At the lip of the roof Alex finds a way to hook his right foot over a sloping knob . Locking off with one arm , he gropes blindly over the lip with his other , feeling for a tiny crease into which he crushes his fingers . With nowhere to go from here , he looks down at the water 25 feet below . In other circumstances falling could have deadly consequences for a free soloist like Alex . With his arms failing , his survival instinct is kicking in . Come on , Alex! Hazel screams , urging him to finish his new route . Alex lunges over the lip with a grunt , but his legs swing out , and he peels off the rock and leaps into the water . I hate jumping off things , Alex says , swimming back to the wall for another try . That night we dock at Kumzar , a village on the northern edge of the peninsula . More than 2 ,000 people live here in one of the oldest settlements in the region . Their densely packed houses crowd a few acres of level ground at the foot of a soaring rock walled ravine . The morning call to prayer , broadcast from speakers mounted on a nearby mosque , awakens us at 5 a .m . Within half an hour a dozen fishermen appear at the wharf to collect the previous day 's catch , left on ice in old refrigerators . The variety of their haul is impressive : sharks , tuna , grouper , snapper , needlefish , and mackerel . The Kumzaris are an extended family with their own language , a legacy of the cultural collision that has been going on here since ancient times . Linguists dont know exactly how Kumzari developed , but it 's genetically related to Persian and Arabian languages , with words borrowed from Hindi , Portuguese , and even English . One theory is that the Kumzaris were originally from the mainland and were pushed out onto the tip of the peninsula by Bedouin Arab invaders in the seventh century . Another , more intriguing theory is that their ancestors had contact with shipwrecked sailors who washed ashore , perhaps as long ago as the Middle Ages . From Kumzar we sail east toward the Fakk al Asad , or lion 's mouth , a narrow strait named for the fanglike red and orange limestone pillars that jut from overhangs at its entrance . Alex and Hazel spend the day working on a 200 foot route up one of the pillars . That night we anchor in the bay at the base of a 500 foot Gothic tower we dub the sand castle . Before joining Alex and Hazel for the climb the next morning , I suggest that we take along ropes and safety gear . As expedition leader , Im responsible for keeping everyone out of harm 's way . The young climbers scoff , saying that to them it 's nothing more than a hike . I think of myself as a young 44 year old , but trying to keep up with these two has made me feel old . During a climb earlier in the trip Alex had scampered up a 1500 foot wall with our rope in his pack . Hold on a second! Id yelled . What if the rest of us needed it? Dont worry , hed replied . Ill stop when I think it 's appropriate for us to rope up . Once again Im slightly annoyed that neither of them seems to care whether Im comfortable climbing without a rope . As a father of three , I have a healthy preoccupation with my well being . Youll be fine , Alex calls down , as he and Hazel disappear from view . The rock here is badly shattered , what climbers call choss . As I cling to the dead vertical wall , I test the integrity of each hold by banging it with the heel of my hand . Sometimes the rock sounds hollow or even moves , and these places I avoid . Staring down between my legs , I see the catamaran bobbing in the bay far below . The last 20 feet turn out to be the hardest part , a steep , crumbling wall that leads to a tiny pinnacle so pointy we have to take turns climbing up onto it . You lived , Hazel says , slapping me a high five as I plop down on a ledge beside Alex and her , my nerves frazzled . Below us the clawlike fingers of the Musandam Peninsula glow orange with the setting sun . Looking down at the tortuous shoreline , which fans out in every direction , were gazing at a lifetime 's worth of climbing . As I turn to my youthful partners for their thoughts , I see theyve already packed up . For them the moment has passed . Let 's go , Alex says impatiently . If we hustle , we can get in another climb before dark . Valery Inozemtsev ascends a high mountain path through the churned mud of development . He climbs past an Olympics dormitory , past a Moscow bureaucrat 's sprawling new dacha and trucks hauling gravel and steel beams past all the things that were never here before . Inozemtsev has lived in this formerly sleepy village of Krasnaya Polyana in the Russian North Caucasus for a half century , since before it became a matter of urgent Kremlin concern . This was the best place in the Soviet Union , he says . Virgin nature . And now ...  His voice trails off in discontent . Inozemtsev , 73 , continues up the mountain in long , youthful strides . Reaching a wood of chestnut trees , he pauses to fling back his brown cape . He runs two fingers over his white , bushy mustache , then points down the mountainside to the cranes and the construction workers who are busy shredding Krasnaya Polyana , shaping it into Russian President Vladimir Putin 's grand public achievement . Sometimes I imagine that an earthquake will come and destroy it all , Inozemtsev says . Through alpine mist , in the southern depths of a once powerful empire , the Olympics have nearly arrived . Russia is an empire no more . Like other great and large nations , however , it still aches to be one . It must find an outlet for its urges , and over two weeks in February , it will have it . Through force of Russian will , the Winter Olympics are coming to an unlikely location . The Sochi Games on the Black Sea coast will take place in the backyard of a recent war with Georgia , on the site of what many call the genocide of a people ( the Circassians ) , and in the orbit of an Islamic insurgency ( in Dagestan , Chechnya , Ingushetiya , and Kabardino Balkariya ) . The state has resurrected a fearsome militia , the Cossacks , to help keep the peace that some might design to upend . Allegations of graft circulate widely , high temperatures threaten the snowfall necessary for competition , and activists have called for a boycott over antigay legislation enacted by the Russian parliament . In response Putin has banned protests and rallies in Sochi during the games . A resort town along the Black Sea 's beaches , Sochi drew the wealthy under Tsar Nicholas II , then Soviet leaders and communist workers , with a complex of sanatoriums built to soothe the ill effects of northern winters . These structures are now wan and disintegrating , the fronds of Slavic palm trees wafting over a more provincial clientele in one of Russia 's few subtropical cities . Though Sochi is host to these Olympic games , however , the actual competitions will be staged elsewhere . The skating events will take place in Adler , 17 miles south along the coastline . Ski races will be in Krasnaya Polyana , 29 miles east into the Caucasus range . Nearly every venue for the games has been built from scratch the ice rinks in Adler , the bobsled run and facsimile alpine villages of Krasnaya Polyana , the rail and infrastructure that connect and enable . The current official price tag , $50 billion , is probably lowballed . Even so , the Sochi Olympics have cost more than any games before them . With many billions of dollars conjured up and carried away , this is not the tightest business plan ever designed . But this is not business . Nor is it mainly a sporting matter . The event is intended to be the culmination of the achievements of Putin , a leader who many Russians believe was dispatched by God to guide Russia away from its defeats and ignominies . The seed of these games was planted in his mind more than a decade ago . A single two lane road runs through the valley formed by the many Caucasian peaks of Krasnaya Polyana . Just a few years ago this was a humble skiing village of a few thousand people , its innocence guarded by the local off piste crowd , an insular place of insider 's lingo and cyclical avalanche . That 's all gone now with the mass construction and the 20 ,000 migrant workers who have arrived to remake the village . Further back in time , this valley bore witness to the destruction of a people who were all but forgotten by the outside world until the Olympics resurrected their memory . Up a side road on a winter afternoon , Astemir Dzhantimirov sits at home , waiting for his boss to dispatch him on a job . Dzhantimirov works for the city 's gas utility , Gorgaz , installing new canisters , fixing old ones . His profession is not his distinguishing feature , however , nor is his prominent nose or his forthright manner . Dzhantimirov , the Russified ending of his family name notwithstanding , is Russian only by citizenship , but this is not what makes him stand out from the many laborers who have flooded the valley . He is Circassian , an ethnic group nearly eliminated from the area 150 years ago , when the tsar 's army overran the mountain dwellers . He lives with his wife and three children on the second floor of a small house . The several interlocking rooms are in good order , quiet as the family tends to homework and chores . Dzhantimirov describes how he learned the old Circassian stories when family would gather at funerals in the Cherkessk region , over the mountains northeast of here . This was the time when my ears were on the top of my head , he says . Aunts and uncles told how the armies of the tsars arrived in the early 1800s , how the Caucasus War continued sporadically for decades , how the Circassians lost the land and much more . When Russia gained the Caucasus , the tsars and their generals knew very little of the region , nor of the numerous tribes and tongues that dwelled within the rocky folds of the range . The Kuban Cossacks , vagabond warriors , patrollers of Russia 's southerly margin , knew better than to penetrate the pined cliffs into which others had roamed to ultimate peril . The stray Russian soldier or wanderer routinely fell into bondage in this territory , bartered from tribe to tribe for goats and herbs and other captives . The Russians gained title to these tactical lands fulfilling what they considered their expansionist destiny by battling the sultan and the shah , but they also understood that a special effort would be required to make them their own . The Circassians and other local peoples fought against the Russians in a determined guerrilla campaign , but not a winnable one . The Russians felt a special pull to the Caucasus to the liveliness of frontier combat , to the forbidden romance of Circassian tribeswomen , to this precipitous place of emotional searching , where a St . Petersburg aristocrat could discard the rules that had molded him and become a new man altogether . In time these mountains would become the place of poets and writers , of Mikhail Lermontov and Leo Tolstoy . Ultimately , Russian military capability proved too much for the warriors of the mountains , who refused to accept the tsar 's offer to live in Siberia or emigrate to the Ottoman Empire . The Circassians made their last stand in the small canyon that is now called Krasnaya Polyana , or red glade , a name some erroneously attribute to the bloodshed of the battle . After their surrender in 1864 the Circassians were expelled , and refugees died by the thousands on their way to Sochi . Survivors were shipped to various corners of the Ottoman Empire . Some of them died aboard the Turkish vessels , cast overboard into the Black Sea . Since the announcement that Sochi would host the games , the Circassians plight has made global headlines as activists in the diaspora have tried to shine a light on what they regard as genocide . Protests were held in cities around the world , in Istanbul and New York , Amman and Vancouver . We didnt go to Russia to fight . They came here to fight us . We lived here several ages , Dzhantimirov says . The whole war was started for these beautiful lands . Dzhantimirov is not an activist . He voted for Putin in the 2012 election . We have lived in Russia for years and years , he says . We have lived side by side , and we have respected each other , and we will stay in Russia . But history is history , and there 's nothing wrong with talking about it . Pyotr Fedin sits at his desk , a dissatisfied success , a mere landowner instead of the alpine entrepreneur he once was , and he tells the story of how government power made it so . The 90s had just begun , and Fedin did what every other shrewd Russian was doing : He opened a business . It was the start of free enterprise , the beginning of what contemporary capitalist Russia would become , a place of trial and error , of encouraging successes and compounded failures . It was a time of pressing on , for there was no turning back to the way things were before . Fedin and his partners surveyed the peaks of Krasnaya Polyana . They cleared the pines and erected metal towers in their place . The driveshaft from a seafaring vessel powered the ski lift . Yet few came to ski Fedin 's groomed run . Those wealthy enough to have such bourgeois interests chose the status resort of Courchevel , France , not provincial Krasnaya Polyana . Things began to change one day in 2000 , when the new president , Vladimir Putin , rode Fedin 's lift to the top of the mountain , then capably navigated his way down . As Russians ascertained what this new leader could do , as he faced down his enemies and closed ranks with his allies , as Russia solidified , Putin returned to Fedin 's slope time and again . Fedin 's son , Dima , taught ministers and minders and oligarchs how to carve a turn , how to stop , and how to save face while falling . The aspirants would not miss their chance to mix with the man who was becoming a type of ruler they recognized from Russia 's long history . Fedin weathered the inclemency of the Russian economy , while his partners fell out , sold out . Then , as the spoils of an oil market boom filtered through Russian society , his resort became profitable . But only the naive enjoy success in Russia . Things you build attract the attention of those who can take them away . The calendar turned to 2008 , and a Gazprom plane arrived from Moscow . As Fedin recalls it , the men from Russia 's largest company , the state controlled gas monopoly , suggested that he join them for a ride . And in veiled language that anyone could understand , while the Gazprom plane flew north over Rostov , then Voronezh and Tula , the men looked at Fedin and said , We respect you . They offered a figure to buy him out . Fedin knew there was nothing he could do . At the darkly prismatic Gazprom tower in Moscow , Fedin signed the papers placed before him . I can see your face , the man with the contracts said to Fedin . You are sad . The money isnt what 's interesting for you . Fedin received fair value , he says , but the business he had built was no longer his . Money is only paper , Fedin said , spelling out his name on the contract . ( A spokesperson for Gazprom said in an email that the company was acquired on commercial terms . ) From his office Fedin 's former resort can be seen through the window behind him . It 's torture , looking at what theyre doing , he says . They came from Moscow and said , We know everything . He speaks of landslides and mudslides and pollution , graft and political ambition . Before the fired head of the ski jump development discovered elevated levels of mercury in his blood ( from some mysterious source ) , before storm waves washed away the multimillion dollar Sochi cargo port , before the minority group protested against holding the games on the site of an alleged genocide , before a helicopter delivering construction materials crashed in a nature preserve , before the Mzymta River jumped its banks , before antigay legislation caused international outrage before all of that , the Sochi Olympics appeared to be a more promising idea . The Russian president traveled to Guatemala City in July 2007 . He spoke the adversary 's English before a gathering of the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) , stirring those in attendance , who marveled at his emergence from the thicket of Russian consonants . It is a testament to the attraction of power that even those whom Putin does not rule often seem dazzled in his presence . And yet , when the IOC awarded the 2014 Winter Games to Sochi , granting Russia the right to host the world , the decision paradoxically heightened the state 's suspicion of foreigners and their motives . The Cossack patrolman keeps company with two policemen as they stroll past the few shops in the village of Krasnaya Polyana . In winter garb , the Cossack stands out : gray jodhpurs , tall black riding boots , brown leather suspenders crisscrossing over a soldier 's greatcoat . It is as though he has arrived from another time . Cossacks founded Krasnodar , now the capital of the region in which Sochi finds itself , after Catherine the Great gave them her blessing in the 18th century . The Cossacks of Krasnodar distinguished themselves as the Kuban Cossacks , after the Kuban River , which flows northwesterly from Mount Elbrus and into the Sea of Azov . They performed the violent and difficult work of defending Russia 's outer domain against raiders who rose northward from the lands of Islam . The Kuban Cossacks existed beyond the law , under a code of their own . After the communists came to power , the institution of the Cossacks was abolished , and for many decades this horseman sect was repressed . Yet by the time that Putin began skiing down Fedin 's mountains , the Kuban Cossacks had regathered their numbers . They had not only survived but also constituted such a political force that the government recognized the wisdom of embracing their fatherland imagery . Weve always been patriots , Yevgeny Razumov says , his black Cossack uniform dotted with raindrops outside Krasnaya Polyana 's redbrick police station . And were still here . The Cossacks have returned to the streets supplementing police foot patrols , breaking up brawls , occasionally starting them , profiling the ethnically non Russian , looking the part , reviving old rites . There are 25 Cossacks on patrol in Krasnaya Polyana , another 25 in Sochi , and 15 each at the airport and train station . There are 1500 total in the Krasnodar region . Alexander Tkachev , the governor of the Krasnodar region and a Cossack himself , dresses in the Cossack uniform from time to time . He is a strong handed leader , and he has bemoaned an increase in the local Caucasian Muslim population . In a speech in which he ushered the Cossacks back into service , Tkachev said that the neighboring Stavropol region had traditionally acted as an ethnic filter for the rest of Russia by assimilating its Caucasian migrants , but with growing minority populations , he feared that was no longer feasible . Recalling the old Cossack role , the sect 's status outside of the law , Tkachev said , suggestively , what you cannot do , a Cossack can . Critics complain that the Cossacks are a reactionary force . But the critic isnt responsible for the safety of others . The Islamist insurgency of the North Caucasus has persisted for 25 years , showing that Russia 's subjugation of these lands remains elusive . A drive to the confluence of the Achipse and Mzymta Rivers in Krasnaya Polyana reveals one more layer of doubt about the placement of these games . The road leads past excavators , trucks , and migrants in hard hats , through a tunnel that drips gray spittle onto the car windshield . At the end of the road two border guards man a checkpoint . In their friendly way they explain that access is prohibited . They point up to the mountain , saying , Abkhazia is over there , three kilometers away . Abkhazia is a disputed territory that broke away from Georgia in the 1990s . After Russia won a war with Georgia in 2008 , it recognized the sovereignty of Abkhazia . Only Nicaragua , Venezuela , Nauru , and Tuvalu likewise recognize the region 's independence , a list that might elicit laughter , except that Abkhazia is no joke . In May 2012 the Federal Security Service ( FSB ) discovered several caches of weapons in this territory just over the mountains from the great Olympics development . Explosives , grenade launchers , shoulder mounted missiles . The FSB arrested three suspects , alleging that they belonged to a terrorist group called the Caucasus Emirate . In July 2013 , Caucasus Emirate leader Doku Umarov urged his followers to prevent the Olympics from taking place . For those who make the North Caucasus one of the world 's most volatile regions , disrupting the Olympics would be their own sort of gold medal . With almost fortnightly occurrence , Russia 's special forces and Muslim militants engage in murderous contact across Dagestan , Chechnya , Ingushetiya , and Kabardino Balkariya . Each place is within a day 's drive of Adler and Krasnaya Polyana , where it would not be difficult to join the migrant army that is building the Olympic infrastructure . In Krasnaya Polyana the workers huddle down a side street between shifts , slugging down warm Coke in a shack with greasy windows . They feed crumpled ruble bills into a machine , putting money on the phones they use to text home to Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan , telling their wives how they earn the money they send for the children . A group trudges up the mud path , reaching Defenders of the Caucasus Street , where they wait for the bus that will return them to the sound of scraping metal , the stink of smoldering solder . Suddenly a Volvo sedan loses control on the road . It swerves across the lane divider and jumps the curb , hitting a man and knocking over a light pole . A crowd gathers . The man lies where he fell , on his back , and does not move . Someone throws a coat over the body , a worn and bloody hand sticking out from beneath it . A police car arrives , and three Cossacks emerge . They pull the driver through the window of the Volvo . He has black hair . He is thin . In his eyes you can see that he is lost , drunk . The Cossacks yell in his face , swear at him , saying that he has killed a man and that he deserves to die . They twist him facedown into the dirt and hold him there . They punch him in the kidneys . The man yells in pain . He submits . The Cossacks handcuff him . They place him in the backseat of their squad car . After the Cossacks drive away , the crowd disperses , as though nothing has happened . The corpse remains in the street . Emergency workers eventually arrive to take it to the morgue . What will be left behind? That is a question many locals want answered those who call Krasnaya Polyana home and have no hand in the muddy profits that have transformed their surroundings . The Olympics have become a prism through which Russia amplifies its message to the world , while downplaying the assaults on humanity , the environment , and the law that have become necessary to achieve the show everyone expects to see . There is a thin line between pragmatism and cynicism , and in Russia you always ride it . This is part of the country 's special attraction . Down in the wine cellar of the Four Peaks Hotel in Krasnaya Polyana , Igor Zubkov uncorks a bottle of Merlot . The hotel belongs to him and his partner , as does the wine , 5000 bottles of red and white produced with the grapes of Anapa , a town up the Black Sea coast . Zubkov holds a glass in his hand . The government said that Russians spend four billion dollars a year on travel out of the country during the winter , Zubkov says . Why waste four billion a year on a three month winter season? Why not keep it for ourselves? State power has transformed Krasnaya Polyana from a sleepy village into a resort with the housing and infrastructure to support an annual winter migration of many thousands . Zubkov looks serious , but then he laughs . So let 's spend $300 billion to build our own resort , he says . That is 75 years worth of expenditures . As with most Russians , it is difficult to tell when Zubkov is joking and when he is serious . As with most Russians , a friendship with Zubkov happens quickly , and could last forever . The time of Putin , who could benefit from a change in the law to stay in office until 2024 , might seem longer . There is a hockey game , part of the World Junior Hockey Championship , and it convenes in the new Olympic rink in Adler . This is a teenage competition , Russia against the United States , and no pairing could be more apt given the message these games are meant to convey . As game time draws near , as the crowd mills about and the skaters glide along the glassy playing surface , a man of some recognition appears on the ice . The loudspeaker announces Vladimir Putin . The Russian anthem plays over the arena speakers . As the song reaches its first crescendo , something interesting happens to Putin , a leader of superhuman composure . The music intensifies , and a ripple of energy rolls across Putin 's face . His expression contorts into a smile . He has brought the Olympics to the Black Sea . He has conceived all this , and now it is really happening . As the look of satisfaction begins to overtake Putin 's features , the Russian president regains himself . He stands firm . He returns his face to a frown . Here 's what it takes to catch a dragon . Slaughter a goat . Cut it up . Enlist a few strong friends to hoist three ten foot long steel traps , grab bags of goat meat , and trek a few miles up and down knee punishing hills . Ignore the 90 plus degree heat that wraps you up and steams you like a dumpling . Set up the first trap with hunks of flesh and hang a few meat bags in trees to scent the air . Hike another couple of miles . Lay another trap . Cover three or four more miles , repeat . Return to camp ; fill a bucket with cold water and dump it over your head . Sleep . Revisit each trap in the morning and afternoon for the next two days . Theyll likely be empty , but if youre lucky , youll draw near , and there it will be : the world 's biggest lizard , a grim faced giant known as the Komodo dragon . The man who devised this scheme is not your stereotypical dragon hunter . Claudio Ciofi , in his late 40s , a biologist and lecturer at the University of Florence , is mellow , slight of build , with kindly eyes . Tidy . He 's the kind of guy who neatly folds his filthy field clothes when he packs to go home . He arrived in Indonesia in 1994 to complete a Ph .D . on dragon genetics . Then he saw the living relics up close . He was entranced . And other scientists werent really paying attention to them . I expected to find an organization studying dragons , he recalls . They are as charismatic and interesting as tigers and orangutans . But there was no one . Komodo dragons were all alone . So Ciofi expanded his research . He sought to understand every aspect of a dragon 's life . With quiet persistence and top notch Indonesian and Australian collaborators , he has given us much of our knowledge of the dragons and is working to improve their chances of surviving their 21st century troubles . Even though they are dragons and can grow as long as 9 .9 feet and weigh nearly 200 pounds , they are still vulnerable to the modern problems that afflict so many animals , from habitat loss to climate change . Of course monitor lizards , as the dragon 's family of animals is known , have survived many cycles of change . This particular species split off maybe five million years ago , but its genus goes back some 40 million , and its dinosaur ancestor lived 200 million years ago . Varanus komodoensis has the lizard lifestyle down basking in the sun , hunting and scavenging , laying and guarding eggs with no intention of being a parent after they hatch . Dragons put in a good 30 to 50 years , most of the time solo . Meanwhile their window on the world is mighty small : Theyre found on just a few islands in Southeast Asia , all within the Indonesian archipelago . Jutting abruptly from the sea , these rugged volcanic lands have palm savannas and grasslands . Up higher are rings of forest . But much of the year the dragons habitat is dragon brown , with monsoon season a brief green reprieve . The earliest record of this extraordinary lizard is likely the three words Here be dragons emblazoned on ancient maps of the region . And surely the first humans who saw the animals would have added : Beware! An avid hunter , the Komodo dragon can hit 12 miles an hour in short bursts . The reptiles ambush their prey , ripping open the softest flesh , typically the belly , or maiming a leg . As a backup , dragons do , in a way , breathe fire . Their mouths drip with venomous saliva that keeps blood from clotting so bite victims bleed out quickly . A wounded victim that gets away is likely to pick up pathogens from watering holes , resulting in infection . Either way , death is almost certain . And dragons can be very patient . The lizards also scavenge theyre opportunists , always on the lookout for food , alive or dead . Scavenging takes less energy than hunting , and the dragons can detect the scent of a rotting carcass from miles away . Little is wasted : The big lizards arent picky about which body parts they eat . Despite the dragon 's somewhat off putting habits , islanders do not necessarily respond with fear and disgust . An Indonesian folk story tells of a prince about to slay a dragon . His mother , the Dragon Princess , appears and cries , Do not kill this animal . She is your sister Orah . I bore you together . Consider her your equal , because you are sebai twins . Modern times have not entirely quashed this belief . In Komodo village I climb a crooked wooden ladder to the house on stilts of an elder named Caco , who guesses his age to be 85 years . My guide says this slight , bespectacled man is a dragon guru ; the elder doesnt refute the title . I ask him how villagers feel about dragons and the danger they pose . People here consider this animal our ancestor , he says . It is sacred . In years past when islanders would kill a deer , he said , theyd leave half the meat as an offering to their scaly relative . Then things changed . Although no one has solid figures , the dragon population appears to have declined over the past 50 years . The government offered legal protection , responding to pressure from conservationists and also realizing the economic value of dragon related tourism . In 1980 much of the dragon 's habitat was turned into Komodo National Park ( KNP ) , which encompasses all of Komodo , Rinca , and other smaller islands . Later three nature reserves were added , two of them on Flores Island . Dragons are safeguarded from any human assault within KNP . What 's more , dragon prey is also off limits : Killing deer is forbidden . And thus villagers are no longer able to offer meat . That , some say , has made the dragons more than a bit peeved . Attacks arent common , but recently a few have made the news . Last year a 6 .5 foot long monitor wandered into an open office in KNP and bit two rangers , each on the left leg . The men were flown to Bali for treatment to prevent infection . Both recovered . In another incident an 83 year old woman fought off a six plus footer with a homemade broom and well placed kicks . The dragon bit her hand , which needed 35 stitches . Other incidents have ended tragically . In 2007 a dragon attacked a village boy named Mansur , who had taken a break from a soccer game to relieve himself behind some trees . He died of blood loss . Today villagers who see a dragon coming close or putting the move on livestock will typically yell and throw rocks . People who live with dragons are used to living with dragons , Ciofi says . You might shoo a squirrel away that comes to steal your lunch . They treat dragons like that . As for dragons that attack , the government has moved offenders away from villages , but the animals usually return . Not all encounters end badly . The first man to really sit with dragons for a spell was Walter Auffenberg , a curator at the Florida State Museum . In 1969 and 70 he and his family camped on Komodo Island for 13 months , recording detailed observations of the animals every move . He authored an insightful book , The Behavioral Ecology of the Komodo Monitor . Auffenberg 's family was surprisingly relaxed about venturing afar to rough it among deadly animals . Packing up powdered milk and chocolate , his wife , Eleanor , told a local newspaper that her best friend thought she was crazy . Crazy , maybe , Eleanor replied . Worried , no . Life in a big city would be more terrifying , she said . During the fieldwork Auffenberg wrote of curious dragons wandering into his blind . One tongue flicked his tape recorder , knife , and feet . To encourage the lizard to leave , he flicked back , tapping it on the head with his pencil . Apparently it worked . Another stretched out in the shade  with his front leg draped over mine as he lay there half asleep . Auffenberg was able to prod the animal to leave without incident . Back in the 70s Auffenberg wasnt that worried about the survival of the Komodo monitors . Today scientists ask : Can these dragons carry on? Dragon salvation relies heavily on the mundane issue of land management . On Flores , despite the nature reserves , locals set fires to clear land for gardens and pastures , breaking dragon habitat into small fragments . Also , some people still hunt the deer and pigs that dragons like , as do feral dogs . And scientists suspect the dogs may chase and even kill young dragons , which spend their first year in the treetops but then come down to earth . So the Flores dragons are boxed in : by villages , farmland , rice fields , the sea , and the dogs . That means less living space and a decline in prey . And ultimately fewer dragons . If a changing climate affects the landscape , the dragons arent well equipped to cope . Ciofi and ecologist Tim Jessop of the University of Melbourne , who 's been researching dragons for the past decade , explain that with fewer than 5 ,000 animals scattered over a small number of islands , there 's reduced genetic diversity , which limits their ability to adapt . The dragons could improve their genetic pool by swimming from island to island to mate . But while theyre capable swimmers , strong currents and differences between island habitats discourage them . Besides , theyre homebodies . To learn more about dragons , Ciofi , Jessop , and their Indonesian colleagues have caught and tagged about a thousand and have DNA samples from 800 . Their efforts have told them a lot about numbers , male female ratios , survival rates , and breeding success and how inbred the populations are . The genetic differences they find arent the kinds of things that show up on the outside bigger teeth or fatter tails . Theyre the seemingly innocent codes within that dictate who survives and who doesnt . Then comes the match game : figuring out how to shift animals from one group to another , making sure the newcomers arent related to each other . A more extreme approach , if numbers were to plummet , would be to ship in zoo animals to bolster the gene pool . In Indonesia Komodo dragons have been breeding in captivity since 1965 . In 1992 the first baby dragon was born outside the homeland , at the National Zoo in Washington , D .C . Since then , breeding efforts have gone like gangbusters . Today about 400 dragons live in zoos worldwide . But playing God is controversial , Jessop notes : We could be breaking the evolutionary integrity messing with the natural path the animals are on . Some people are reluctant to do that . Besides , programs that relocate local animals only work about half the time . Nor is the transition from zoo life to the wild an easy one . And there is no guarantee that putting adult dragons together will yield offspring or that the dragons can survive long term in such unevenly protected habitat . Ciofi and his colleagues are respectfully pressing Indonesian officials and mustering support for dragon preservation . They speak to islanders on Flores of the danger to dragons from habitat loss and the poaching of prey . They hope to better monitor protected areas and train rangers in dragon biology so they can offer information to scientists about how the animals are faring . Meanwhile tourists who come to see dragons other than the lazy ones hanging around the ranger station must be patient . The wilder animals dont like to be found . During my two weeks on the islands I mostly chase after biologists on futile dragon hunts . Our hiking pace is set by young , fit Indonesians Deni Purwandana and Achmad Ariefiandy , who lead the Komodo Survival Program , established in 2007 . Then comes Jessop , a giant of an Aussie whose single stride requires three of mine . A few nature reserve staffers and a couple of villagers , untroubled by heat and hills , round out the team . When Ciofi and I arrive on Flores , the team 's 26 traps have caught just four dragons ( and many more dogs ) , down from 14 the same time the year before . But this may not indicate a reduced population . Cameras at the sites show the dragons sniffing traps , then deciding not to walk inside . The elder I met , Caco , had told me villagers used to offer tree seeds , a local tree leaf , an egg , and the tobacco from one cigarette to lure dragons out of the hills . He presented me with seeds and a leaf . I am tempted to use them . Then on my second to last day , the stars align . There are three traps to check . The first round nothing . On the next circuit we see pebbly skin through the gaps of trap number three . It 's just a little dragon , less than four feet nose to tail tip , perhaps three years old . Subtly pretty ( if you keep an open mind ) , it has dark gray , yellow , and orange body scales and faded dark bands down the tail . I kneel for a better look through a hole in the metal ; it peers back with one yellow ringed eye . Then the dragon catchers remove it with hook and lasso , tape its mouth closed ( for our protection ) , and gently but firmly tie its legs and arms to its body to keep it still . Next comes a flurry of activity . The team quickly measures the captive , weighs it in a sling , and uses a microchip reader to search ( in vain ) for a tag beneath the skin that would represent a previous capture . Blood is drawn from the tail for genetic analysis ; photos are snapped from every angle . The trappers who seek to preserve this ancient species speak matter of factly of the encounter : It 's our job . In less than 20 minutes off comes the mouth tape , and the animal is set free . It takes off like a shot into the woods , flinging dirt and rocks with madly scraping claws the no nonsense retreat of a real life dragon . Van Wedeen strokes his half gray beard and leans toward his computer screen , scrolling through a cascade of files . Were sitting in a windowless library , surrounded by speckled boxes of old letters , curling issues of scientific journals , and an old slide projector that no one has gotten around to throwing out . Itll take me a moment to locate your brain , he says . On a hard drive Wedeen has stored hundreds of brains exquisitely detailed 3 D images from monkeys , rats , and humans , including me . Wedeen has offered to take me on a journey through my own head . Well hit all the tourist spots , he promises , smiling . This is my second trip to the Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging , located in a former ship rope factory on Boston Harbor . The first time , a few weeks ago , I offered myself as a neuroscientific guinea pig to Wedeen and his colleagues . In a scanning room I lay down on a slab , the back of my head resting in an open plastic box . A radiologist lowered a white plastic helmet over my face . I looked up at him through two eyeholes as he screwed the helmet tight , so that the 96 miniature antennas it contained would be close enough to my brain to pick up the radio waves it was about to emit . As the slab glided into the cylindrical maw of the scanner , I thought of The Man in the Iron Mask . The magnets that now surrounded me began to rumble and beep . For an hour I lay still , eyes closed , and tried to keep myself calm with my own thoughts . It wasnt easy . To squeeze as much resolution as possible out of the scanner , Wedeen and his colleagues had designed the device with barely enough room for a person of my build to fit inside . To tamp down the panic , I breathed smoothly and transported myself to places in my memory , at one point recalling how I had once walked my nine year old daughter to school through piles of blizzard snow . As I lay there , I reflected on the fact that all of these thoughts and emotions were the creation of the three pound loaf of flesh that was under scrutiny : my fear , carried by electrical impulses converging in an almond shaped chunk of tissue in my brain called the amygdala , and the calming response to it , marshaled in regions of my frontal cortex . My memory of my walk with my daughter was coordinated by a seahorse shaped fold of neurons called the hippocampus , which reactivated a vast web of links throughout my brain that had first fired when I had clambered over the snowbanks and formed those memories . I was submitting to this procedure as part of my cross country reporting to chronicle one of the great scientific revolutions of our times : the stunning advances in understanding the workings of the human brain . Some neuroscientists are zooming in on the fine structure of individual nerve cells , or neurons . Others are charting the biochemistry of the brain , surveying how our billions of neurons produce and employ thousands of different kinds of proteins . Still others , Wedeen among them , are creating in unprecedented detail representations of the brain 's wiring : the network of some 100 ,000 miles of nerve fibers , called white matter , that connects the various components of the mind , giving rise to everything we think , feel , and perceive . The U .S . government is throwing its weight behind this research through the Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies ( BRAIN ) Initiative . In an announcement last spring President Barack Obama said that the large scale project aimed to speed up the mapping of our neural circuitry , giving scientists the tools they need to get a dynamic picture of the brain in action . As they see the brain in action , neuroscientists can also see its flaws . They are starting to identify differences in the structure of ordinary brains and brains of people with disorders such as schizophrenia , autism , and Alzheimer 's disease . As they map the brain in greater detail , they may learn how to diagnose disorders by their effect on anatomy , and perhaps even understand how those disorders arise . On my return trip to his lab Wedeen finally locates the image from my session in the scanner . My brain appears on his screen . His technique , called diffusion spectrum imaging , translates radio signals given off by the white matter into a high resolution atlas of that neurological Internet . His scanner maps bundles of nerve fibers that form hundreds of thousands of pathways carrying information from one part of my brain to another . Wedeen paints each path a rainbow of colors , so that my brain appears as an explosion of colorful fur , like a psychedelic Persian cat . Wedeen focuses in on particular pathways , showing me some of the circuitry important to language and other kinds of thought . Then he pares away most of the pathways in my brain , so that I can more easily see how theyre organized . As he increases the magnification , something astonishing takes shape before me . In spite of the dizzying complexity of the circuits , they all intersect at right angles , like the lines on a sheet of graph paper . It 's all grids , says Wedeen . When Wedeen first unveiled the grid structure of the brain , in 2012 , some scientists were skeptical , wondering if hed uncovered only part of a much more tangled anatomy . But Wedeen is more convinced than ever that the pattern is meaningful . Wherever he looks in the brains of humans , monkeys , rats he finds the grid . He notes that the earliest nervous systems in Cambrian worms were simple grids just a pair of nerve cords running from head to tail , with runglike links between them . In our own lineage the nerves at the head end exploded into billions but still retained that gridlike structure . It 's possible that our thoughts run like streetcars along these white matter tracks as signals travel from one region of the brain to another . There 's zero chance that there are not principles lurking in this , says Wedeen , peering intently at the image of my brain . Were just not yet in a position to see the simplicity . Scientists are learning so much about the brain now that it 's easy to forget that for much of history we had no idea at all how it worked or even what it was . In the ancient world physicians believed that the brain was made of phlegm . Aristotle looked on it as a refrigerator , cooling off the fiery heart . From his time through the Renaissance , anatomists declared with great authority that our perceptions , emotions , reasoning , and actions were all the result of animal spirits mysterious , unknowable vapors that swirled through cavities in our head and traveled through our bodies . The scientific revolution in the 17th century began to change that . The British physician Thomas Willis recognized that the custardlike tissue of the brain was where our mental world existed . To understand how it worked , he dissected brains of sheep , dogs , and expired patients , producing the first accurate maps of the organ . It would take another century for researchers to grasp that the brain is an electric organ . Instead of animal spirits , voltage spikes travel through it and out into the body 's nervous system . Still , even in the 19th century scientists knew little about the paths those spikes followed . The Italian physician Camillo Golgi argued that the brain was a seamless connected web . Building on Golgi 's research , the Spanish scientist Santiago Ramn y Cajal tested new ways of staining individual neurons to trace their tangled branches . Cajal recognized what Golgi did not : that each neuron is a distinct cell , separate from every other one . A neuron sends signals down tendrils known as axons . A tiny gap separates the ends of axons from the receiving ends of neurons , called dendrites . Scientists would later discover that axons dump a cocktail of chemicals into the gap to trigger a signal in the neighboring neuron . Jeff Lichtman , a neuroscientist , is the current Ramn y Cajal Professor of Arts and Sciences at Harvard , carrying Cajal 's project into the 21st century . Instead of making pen and ink drawings of neurons stained by hand , he and his colleagues are creating extremely detailed three dimensional images of neurons , revealing every bump and stalk branching from them . By burrowing down to the fine structure of individual nerve cells , they may finally get answers to some of the most basic questions about the nature of the brain . Each neuron has on average 10 ,000 synapses . Is there some order to their connections to other neurons , or are they random? Do they prefer linking to one type of neuron over others? To produce the images , Lichtman and his colleagues load pieces of preserved mouse brain into a neuroanatomical version of a deli meat slicer , which pares off layers of tissue , each less than a thousandth the thickness of a strand of human hair . The scientists use an electron microscope to take a picture of each cross section , then use a computer to order them into a stack . Slowly a three dimensional image takes shape one that the scientists can explore as if they were in a submarine traveling through an underwater kelp forest . Everything is revealed , says Lichtman . The only problem is the sheer enormity of everything . So far the largest volume of a mouse 's brain that Lichtman and his colleagues have managed to re create is about the size of a grain of salt . Its data alone total a hundred terabytes , the amount of data in about 25 ,000 high definition movies . Once the scientists have gathered this information , the really hard work begins : looking for the rules that organize the brain 's seeming chaos . Recently Lichtman 's postdoctoral researcher Narayanan Kasthuri set out to analyze every detail in a cylinder of mouse brain tissue measuring just a thousand cubic microns a volume 1/100 ,000 the size of a grain of salt . He selected a region surrounding a short segment of a single axon , seeking to identify every neuron that passed through it . That minuscule patch of brain turned out to be like a barrel of seething snakes . Kasthuri found a thousand axons and about 80 dendrites , each making about 600 connections with other neurons inside the cylinder . It 's a wake up call to how much more complicated brains are than the way we think about them , says Lichtman . Complicated , but not random . Lichtman and Kasthuri discovered that every neuron made nearly all its connections with just one other one , scrupulously avoiding a connection with almost all the other neurons packed tightly around it . They seem to care who theyre connected to , Lichtman says . Lichtman cant say yet whether this fastidious pattern is a general rule or a feature of just the tiny area of mouse brain he sampled . Even as they scale up the technology , he and his colleagues will need another two years to complete a scan of all 70 million neurons in a mouse . I ask about scanning an entire human brain , which contains a thousand times more neurons than a mouse 's . I dont dwell on that , he says , with a laugh . It 's too painful . When and if Lichtman completes his three dimensional portrait of the brain , it will reveal much but it will still be only an exquisitely detailed sculpture . His imaged neurons are hollow models ; real neurons are crammed with living DNA , proteins , and other molecules . Each type of neuron uses a distinct set of genes to build the molecular machinery it needs to do its own job . Light sensitive neurons in the eyes produce photon catching proteins , for example , and neurons in a region called the substantia nigra produce dopamine , crucial to our sense of reward . The geography of proteins and other chemicals is essential to understanding how the brain works and how it goes awry . In Parkinson 's disease the substantia nigra neurons produce less dopamine than normal , for reasons that arent yet clear . Alzheimer 's disease scatters tangles of protein through the brain , although scientists have yet to firmly settle on how those tangles give rise to the devastating dementia the disease causes . A map of the brain 's molecular machinery called the Allen Brain Atlas has been generated at the Allen Institute for Brain Science in Seattle , founded ten years ago with funds from Microsoft co founder Paul Allen . Using the brains of recently deceased people , donated by their families , researchers there use a high resolution magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) scan of each brain as a three dimensional road map , then slice it into microscopically thin sections that are mounted on glass slides . They then douse the sections with chemicals that reveal the presence of active genes harbored in the neurons . So far the researchers have mapped the brains of six people , charting the activity of 20000 protein coding genes at 700 sites within each brain . It 's a colossal amount of data , and theyve only begun to make sense of it . The scientists estimate that 84 percent of all the genes in our DNA become active somewhere in the adult brain . ( A simpler organ like the heart or pancreas requires far fewer genes to work . ) In each of the 700 sites the scientists studied , the neurons switch on a distinct collection of genes . In a preliminary survey of two regions of the brain , the scientists compared a thousand genes that were already known to be important for neuron function . From one person to the next , the areas of the brain where each of those genes was active were practically identical . It looks as if the brain has a finely grained genetic landscape , with special combinations of genes carrying out tasks in different locations . The secret to many diseases of the brain may be hiding in that landscape , as certain genes shut down or switch on abnormally . All the information from the Allen Brain Atlas is posted online , where other scientists can navigate through the data with custom made software . Already theyre making new discoveries . A team of Brazilian scientists , for instance , has used it to study a devastating brain disorder called Fahr 's disease , which calcifies regions deep inside the brain , leading to dementia . Some cases of Fahr 's disease had already been linked to a mutation in the gene SLC20A2 . In the atlas the scientists found that SLC20A2 is most active in precisely the regions that are targeted by the disease . They also found a network of other genes that is most active in the same areas , and now theyre trying to find out whether theyre involved in Fahr 's disease as well . Of all the new ways of visualizing the brain , perhaps the most remarkable is one invented by Stanford neuroscientist and psychiatrist Karl Deisseroth and his colleagues . To see the brain , they begin by making it disappear . On my visit to Deisseroth 's lab , undergraduate Jenelle Wallace led me to a bench where half a dozen beakers rested in a plastic foam base . She pulled one out and pointed to a grape size mouse brain resting at the bottom . I didnt look at the brain so much as through it . It was nearly as transparent as a glass marble . Needless to say , a normal human or mouse brain is decidedly opaque , its cells swathed in fat and other compounds that block light . That 's why Cajal had to dye neurons in order to see them and why Lichtman 's group and the Allen Institute scientists slice the brain into thin sections to gain access to its inner depths . The advantage of a transparent brain is that it allows us to peer into its workings while the organ is still intact . Along with postdoctoral researcher Kwanghun Chung , Deisseroth came up with a recipe to replace the light scattering compounds in the brain with transparent molecules . After making a mouse brain transparent in this way , they can then douse the brain with glowing chemical labels that latch on to only certain proteins or trace a specific pathway connecting neurons in distant regions of the brain . The scientists can then wash out one set of chemicals and add another that reveals the location and structure of a different type of neuron in effect untangling the Gordian knot of neural circuits one by one . You dont have to take it apart to show the wiring , says Deisseroth . It 's not easy to dazzle neuroscientists , but Deisseroth 's method , dubbed CLARITY , has left his colleagues awestruck . It 's pretty badass , says Christof Koch , the chief scientific officer at the Allen Institute . Wedeen has called the research spectacular  ... unlike anything else in the field . Because of our shared evolutionary heritage , a clarified mouse brain can reveal a great deal about human brain function . But Deisseroth 's ultimate goal is to perform the same transformation with a human brain a far more difficult task , not least because a human brain is 3 ,000 times as large as that of a mouse . A CLARITY picture showing the location of just one type of protein in just one human brain would create a monstrous heap of data about two petabytes , or the equivalent of several hundred thousand high def movies . Deisseroth anticipates that CLARITY may someday help the sort of people he treats in his psychiatric practice , by revealing hidden features of disorders like autism and depression . But for now he 's keeping those hopes in check . We have so far to go before we can affect treatments that I tell people , Dont even think about that yet , he says . It 's just a voyage of discovery for now . As revealing as a transparent brain may prove to be , it will still be dead . Scientists need different tools to explore the terrain of living brains . The scanners Wedeen uses to trace white matter patterns can , with different programming , record the brain in action . Functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) pinpoints regions of the brain recruited during a mental task . Over the past couple of decades fMRI has helped reveal networks involved in all manner of thought processes , from recognizing faces to enjoying a cup of coffee to remembering a traumatic event . It 's easy to be dazzled by fMRI images , which festoon the brain with rainbow blobs . But it 's important to bear in mind that those images are actually quite coarse . The most powerful scanners can record activity only down to the scale of a cubic millimeter a sesame seed 's worth of tissue . Within that space , hundreds of thousands of neurons are firing in synchronized patterns , trading signals . How those signals give rise to the larger patterns revealed by fMRI remains mysterious . There are ridiculously simple questions about the cortex that we cant answer at all , says Clay Reid , a former colleague of Jeff Lichtman 's at Harvard who moved to the Allen Institute in 2012 . Reid has come to Seattle hoping to answer some of those questions with a grand series of experiments he and his colleagues call MindScope . Their goal is to understand how a large number of neurons carry out a complex task . The function Reid and his colleagues have chosen to decipher is vision . Scientists have been investigating how we see for decades , but theyve been able to study it only piecemeal . A neuroscientist might place an electrode in the region of a mouse 's brain involved in visual perception and then note whether nearby neurons fire when the animal sees a particular image . This approach has allowed scientists to map regions of the visual brain that specialize in different tasks , such as detecting the edges of an object or perceiving brightness . But scientists havent been able to see all those regions work together at once to learn how the million or so neurons in the visual regions of a mouse 's brain instantly put information together into the image of a cat . Reid and his colleagues are setting out to solve that problem by engineering mice so that their visual neurons will release flashes of light when they fire . The flashes record the neural activity when a mouse sees a specific object , be it a cat , a snake , or an appealing piece of cheese . The scientists can then compile the data to create massive mathematical models of vision . If the models are accurate , the researchers will be able to literally read the mind of a mouse . Our goal is to reconstruct what the mouse sees , says Reid . And I think we can do it . Reid 's research on mouse vision is another step toward neuroscience 's ultimate goal : a comprehensive view of how this vastly complicated organ really works what the scientists I talked to call a theory of the brain . Such a grand vision is still a long way off , and for the most part , the search for it has yet to change the way doctors treat patients . But there is one line of research brain machine interfaces where the mapping of the mind has started to change people 's lives . When she was 43 years old , Cathy Hutchinson suffered a massive stroke , leaving her unable to move or speak . Lying in her bed in Massachusetts General Hospital , she gradually figured out that her doctors didnt know if she was brain dead or still aware . Her sister asked Hutchinson if she could understand her . She managed to answer by moving her eyes up on command . It gave me such a relief , Hutchinson tells me 17 years later , because everybody talked about me as if I was dying . It is a chilly winter day at her home in eastern Massachusetts , and she 's sitting in a wheelchair in the middle of the living room , dressed in a dark green jogging suit and sneakers . Still almost completely paralyzed and unable to speak , she communicates by looking at letters arrayed on a computer monitor bolted to her wheelchair , a camera tracking the movement of a tiny metal disk attached to the center of her eyeglasses . Near the top of the brain is a region called the motor cortex , where we generate commands to move our muscles . For more than a century weve known that each part of the cortex corresponds to a particular area of the body . When people like Hutchinson become paralyzed , the motor cortex often remains intact , but it cant communicate with the rest of the body , because its connections have been destroyed . John Donoghue , a neuroscientist at Brown University , wanted to find a way to help people with paralysis by tapping into the signals from their motor cortex . Perhaps they could eventually learn to type on a computer or operate a machine merely with their thoughts . Donoghue spent years developing an implant and testing the device on monkeys . Once he and his colleagues knew it was safe , they were ready to start working with human patients . One of them was Hutchinson . In 2005 surgeons at Rhode Island Hospital drilled a hole the size of a poker chip in her skull and inserted the sensor for Donoghue 's device . About the size of a ladybug , the sensor contained a hundred miniature needles , which , pressing into Hutchinson 's motor cortex , recorded the signals from nearby neurons . A set of wires anchored to this device passed through the hole in her skull and led to a metal connector sitting on her scalp . After her surgery had healed , the Brown University researchers plugged Hutchinson 's implant into a cable that relayed signal patterns from her brain to a cart of computers they wheeled into her room . As a first step , the scientists trained the computers to recognize signals in her motor cortex and use them to move a computer cursor around a screen . This was achieved the first time she tried because they had learned how to translate patterns of brain activity into movements . Two years later they coupled a robotic arm to the computers , refining a program that could interpret Hutchinson 's brain signals to move the arm forward and back , to raise it up and down , and to open its robotic fingers and squeeze them shut . After just a few sessions Hutchinson , the computer , and the robotic arm had become a team . It felt natural , she tells me . So natural that one day she reached out for a cinnamon latte , grabbed it , and brought it to her lips to drink . Cathy 's smile when she put down that drink that 's everything , Donoghue says . Today Donoghue and other scientists are building on that success , hoping to create human machine interfaces that will be powerful , safe , and easy . At Duke University Miguel Nicolelis has been experimenting with exoskeletons that strap on to the body . Signals from the brain control each limb . Already he has gotten monkeys to control full body exoskeletons . If all goes well , a paraplegic wearing a simpler version of the device will deliver the opening kick at the 2014 World Cup in Nicolelis 's native Brazil . Eventually brain implants will become as common as heart implants , says Nicolelis . I have no doubt about that . When it comes to the brain , predicting the future is a tricky game . Advances in the past have inspired giddy expectations that in many cases have not been met . We cant tell a schizophrenic brain from an autistic brain from a normal brain , says Christof Koch . But the research that 's going on now , he believes , is moving neuroscience to a remarkable new stage . I think we can begin to put the pieces together . Approaching Minneapolis St . Paul Airport from the east , the plane descends over the green fields of Wisconsin and the St . Croix River into Minnesota , just above the farm in Denmark Township where my mother spent happy summer days visiting her sister Margaret snapshots of girls in white summer dresses standing , holding their bicycles , Grace and Elsie and Ina squinting in the bright 1934 sunlight and passes south of downtown St . Paul and the gleam of steel rails that carried Dad in the mail car of the Empire Builder departing Union Depot for Seattle , a  .38 snub nosed revolver on his hip , and past the cathedral near where I now live on a street of old stone mausoleums and the hospital where I walked in one day and said , I think Im having a stroke ( and I was ) , and we bank over Mendota , where back in my drinking days I hung out in a club devoted to New Orleans jazz and heard the great Billie and DeDe Pierce , and Willie and Percy Humphrey , and we come in low over the Minnesota River and as the plane touches down on the runway , I can see the hill where I used to park in a car with a girl and watch planes land and also make out , back in the days of the front seat when two people could get involved with each other in thrilling ways . A one minute flight into the past , and if wed landed from the north , thered be more . There 's a newer north south runway , and on that approach I dont recognize a thing . It 's all road tangle and malls , small and large , and we descend below 5000 feet , and still I cant get my bearings it could be the outskirts of Dallas or Tangier and I start to feel Ive lost my place in the world . I was born here . Im 71 years old . Ive lived most of my life here . I refuse to use a GPS here . And it is distressing to come home and not know where I am . But driving east from the airport , there is the Mississippi , and I am reoriented . My grandma Dora Keillor was riding in my dad 's car one winter day in 1957 when the car spun out of control on an icy highway and did a doughnut or two and stopped , still on the road . Grandma didnt cry out ; she looked straight ahead out the windshield . John , she said , which way is north? I share that need for clarity . When a man has lived in one place so long , he takes comfort in landmarks . The State Theater , the Basilica of St . Mary , the Grain Belt beer sign on Hennepin . I will go out of my way to cruise by the white tower of the horticulture building at the state fairgrounds and the grandstand and the remains of the racetrack where auto thrill show drivers raced late model Fords off ramps and through flaming hoops and a woman in a spangly suit dived from a high tower into a water tank . When Northwestern National Bank was sold to a giant chain , whose brass decided to do away with the beloved Weatherball ( When the Weatherball is white , colder weather is in sight ) , it was like a death in the family . The geography of Minneapolis St . Paul is simple : Two interlocking cities the Great River with its rhythmic spelling M i ss i ss i pp i flowing in from the north , through Anoka and over St . Anthony Falls , past the glass towers of downtown Minneapolis crowded around the Foshay Tower , the brave little skyscraper of my childhood , and the university campus with its long leafy mall and stone columns with the inscription about men being ennobled by understanding , which we certainly hope will come true someday , and the very noble Franklin Avenue bridge , and Fort Snelling , where , starting in 1819 , our predecessors brought whiskey and smallpox to the frontier and where , in 1861 , the First Minnesota Volunteers mustered and later took horrible casualties at Gettysburg but held their ground . Where the Minnesota River joins it from the west , the Mississippi does a sideways S through St . Paul , its rail yards , University Avenue with its entrepreneurial churn of storefront start ups , Asian restaurants , muffler shops , then it crosses town near the great dome of the capitol with the team of golden horses on the roof , and bends south toward Red Wing , Winona , Dubuque , down to Prof . Harold Hill and Huck Finn territory . The cities contain stately lakes Como and Phalen in St . Paul ; in Minneapolis , Nokomis , Hiawatha , Harriet , Calhoun , Cedar , and Lake of the Isles , pools of ease and elegance on the asphalt grid and Lake Minnetonka , the prairie Riviera , off to the southwest . This geography was imprinted in my brain back when I learned my alphabet from the avenues of Minneapolis ( Aldrich , Bryant , Colfax , Dupont , Emerson , Fremont , Girard , Humboldt , Irving , James , Knox through Xerxes , York , and Zenith ) , which I might recite on my deathbed to prove I still have brain function . Superimposed over that geography , like a Jackson Pollock painted on a fishnet , is the geography of a man 's life , the griefs and pleasures of various streets , Washington Avenue along which I had to memorize a Bible verse every Sunday , Nicollet and the funeral home and the corpse in the coffin , street corners where I used to wait for a bus on those killer mornings in January and February , the landmarks of experience Loring Park , where I liked to sit and smoke after a ten hour day in the hotel scullery where I washed pots and pans after high school . At the end of a day in the steam of the dishwasher , a summer evening was blessedly cool , and the smoke was ecstatic . Girls strolled by in loose white blouses and skirts , and some stopped and asked for a light and leaned down , holding their hair back , and the lit match illuminated their faces like medieval saints . In that park I am still 18 and in a state of adoration , but driving east on Franklin I feel an ache in my gut passing the building where I helped clean the small dim apartment of my former wife after she died , her souvenirs scattered around , the loneliness of the furniture , the unspeakable sadness of the cupboards full of health food . I drove to the river and sat by the bridge and wept 30 years worth of tears . My Minneapolis is the south side : Blocks of stucco bungalows under majestic archways of elms , small well kept yards , the birdbath , gazing globe , coiled green rubber hose , grape arbor , steel barrel incinerator , and skinny frame garage on the alley where my mother grew up around 38th Street with her 12 siblings , most of whom settled in the neighborhood . And if I walk those blocks today , I feel the old claustrophobia of Sunday afternoon after dinner , the smell of wax and polish , the figurines on the walnut highboy , the good china in glass cabinets , Grandpa and Grandma on the sofa , nibbling on butterscotch caramel candy , George Beverly Shea singing How Great Thou Art . We attended church at the Grace & Truth Gospel Hall on 14th Avenue South , where a preacher clutched his suspenders and spoke glowingly of Eternity , and I grew up one of the Brethren , the Chosen to whom God had vouchsafed the Knowledge of All Things that was denied to the great and mighty . The Second Coming was imminent , we would rise to the sky . We walked around Minneapolis carefully , wary of television , dance music , tobacco , baubles , bangles , flashy cars , liquor , the theater , the modern novel all of them tempting us away from the singular life that Jesus commanded us to lead . In 1947 Dad got a GI loan and built us a little white house north of the city on an acre of cornfield in Brooklyn Township , a stone 's throw from the Mississippi , so he could have a garden , farm boy that he was . He loved fresh vegetables , sweet corn and tomatoes and strawberries . A half acre garden was a lot of work , but he had six kids , and he felt that work was a privilege , and he wanted us to grow up privileged . It was a boy 's paradise . We played at Victory Field , an abandoned grass airstrip used for pilot training during WWII , a big hangar with skeletal remains of old Piper Cubs . We made our own ball field in a vacant lot with a chicken wire backstop and shot baskets in January , sliding around on frozen gravel driveways wearing cotton gloves with the fingertips cut off . Beyond the backyard gardens lay a twisting ravine , site of Civil War and Three Musketeers reenactments ( Sacre bleu , mon Dieu , unhand that rapier! ) , that led to a stretch of sandy riverbank under the cottonwoods . Grown ups seldom ventured there . We got to swim naked and skate on the river ice , but we were only five miles from the big city , which after the war was still a streetcar city at the end of the line , the city stopped short ; the cornfields began . From the 31st floor observation deck of the Foshay Tower downtown , you saw farmland and silos to the north and west . When I was 12 , I rode my bike alone into the city , past the lumber mills , foundries , machine shops , barrel factory , and printing plants , along Washington Avenue and past a meatpacking plant where bare chested men wrestled whole beef carcasses hung on hooks on little overhead trolleys along a rail and into the waiting trucks . I pedaled up Hennepin Avenue , past dirty book stores , penny arcades , walk up hotels , men slumped in doorways , to the magnificent old public library on Tenth across from White Castle , home of the ten cent hamburger ( Buy em by the Sack ) , and climbed up to the reading room , skipping the swimming lesson at the Y Mother had paid for so Id learn to swim after cousin Roger drowned in Lake Minnetonka ; but the Y conducted swim class in the nude and I was shy , so I went to the library instead and met the book that changed my life transformed , enriched , diversified , turned it topsy turvy too Roget 's International Thesaurus , supplier of idiom , lingo , jargon , argot , blather , and phraseology that transformed me from nerd and nobody to visionary , sporting man , roughneck , bon vivant , and raconteur . Growing up among the Brethren , a boy was ever aware of worldly temptation , and from that comes a keener perception of the world . A school field trip to the Milwaukee depot where the Hiawatha stood throbbing , waiting to depart for Chicago , steam hissing from the locomotive , the luxurious club car blue with cigar smoke from slick gents in three piece suits for the Brethren boy , an electric vision of worldly success and glamour . When I was 14 , I got a tour of the art deco headquarters of the Minneapolis Star and Tribune . Upstairs , pencil neck geeks tapping out copy and down below , the giant presses roaring , miles of newsprint flying out , chopped and folded into the evening Star , bundles of papers conveyed onto trucks and rushed to the readers , and the thought rang like a bell : I could be one of those guys upstairs . There were the neon lights of Hennepin Avenue and the promise of naked girls at the Alvin Theater , which our family passed on Sunday morning on our way to church , but that was lost on me , a geek with glasses , pressed pants , plaid shirt , a boy for whom dating girls was like exploring the Amazon interesting idea , but how to get there? Writing for print , on the other hand why not? And then came the beautiful connection : You write for print , it impresses girls , they might want to go on dates with you . A boy named Frankie Renko drowned in the river one spring at the sandy bank where we boys hung out . I was eating supper when the fire truck went by , and I wanted to go see , but Mother said , There 's no point in a bunch of rubberneckers standing around gawking . She said it was unseemly to look upon the sufferings of others if you were powerless to help . Years later , a photographer at the St . Paul Pioneer Press , where I worked on the copydesk , writing obits , showed me his collection of pictures of dead people , drowned or shot or crushed in cars , but I did not look at them long . ( I wanted to , but I didnt want him to think I was the sort of person who did . ) For days after Frankie drowned , I visited the death scene , trying to imagine what had happened . He was paddling a boat near the shore , and it capsized , and he drowned . I imagined this over and over , imagined myself saving him , imagined the vast gratitude of his family . I dont recall discussing this with other boys . We were more interested in what lay ahead in seventh grade , where ( we had heard ) you had to take showers after gym . Naked . With no clothes on . Which turned out to be true . Junior high was up the West River Road in Anoka , the town where I was born , 1942 , in a house on Ferry Street , delivered by Dr . Mork . That fall of seventh grade , he listened to my heart and heard a click in the mitral valve , which meant I couldnt play football , so I walked into the Anoka Herald and asked for a job covering football and basketball , and a man named Warren Feist said yes and made me a professional writer . Ask and ye shall receive . After seventh grade I was suddenly too old for the ravine and the riverbank . The next summer I worked on nearby truck farms , hoeing corn , picking potatoes . Other boys inherited the riverbank . I worked . At 18 I proceeded directly downriver to the University of Minnesota and the smoke filled classrooms of Folwell Hall and football Saturdays and the blare of the glorious Rouser and old alums in their 40s lumbering lead footed toward Memorial Stadium . I had literary ambitions so did others and we found each other and coalesced . We wrote dense jagged unreadable poems and exulted in obscurity , boys with long hair and girls with jiggly breasts under their aboriginal blouses , everyone skinny as snakes . I spent six years sorting through various personas ( Boy Scholar , Embittered Poet , Dangerous Radical , Wry Humorist ) and wound up with the one that paid a salary : Friendly Announcer . I did all of this a couple miles from the Brethren , which made for interesting collisions . Standing outside the 400 Bar , smoking a Pall Mall , and a car honks , and it 's Aunt Jean and Uncle Les . Drop the smoke , walk to the car , say hi , smile , try not to exhale . And now devout Muslims from Somalia live in the old Brethren neighborhood ; robed women and somber elders watch teenage Somali girls go by in short shorts and daring tank tops and product in their hair . Same play , new actors . From the U , I traipsed down the long winding trail of adulthood , walk up apartments , dingy offices , cheap cafs , public library , softball diamonds , beer joints , and Grand Avenue , the street I drove down to work at 4 a .m . to do the morning shift on KSJN in a basement studio on Wabasha and then a storefront on Sixth Street , the house where I lived next to Luther Seminary and the backyard parties with musicians that inspired A Prairie Home Companion at Macalester College , the dramatic leap to home ownership on Cathedral Hill in St . Paul , where Ive lived most of the last 20 years , where you drive up from I 94 past Masqueray 's magnificent cathedral , whose great dome and towers and arches give you a momentary illusion of Europe , and up Summit and the mansions of 19th century grandees and pooh bahs in a ward that votes about 85 percent Democratic today . You look out your kitchen window at a street from McKinley 's America , and then three slender young women go running by , ponytails bouncing , wires coming out of their ears . In all , I count 26 places Ive lived in the Twin Cities , about half on the west side of the river , half on the east , all within a few miles of downtown : A restless fugitive for 50 years , mostly within Hennepin and Ramsey Counties , now in a neighborhood where Mother , at 17 , sold peanut butter cookies door to door during the Depression on a ridge above the river I loved as a boy . The Empire Builder rolls by a few blocks below me , my dad sorting mail , while my teenage mother comes to the door with bags of cookies , and my brother Phil and I paddle the wooden canoe we longed to own , and I am variously 12 and 43 and 71 years old : It 's all conflated in my mind , like layers of a medieval town . The Old Resident mourns for the Old City , though he understands that his classmates and cousins had babies and the metro area has more than twice as many people as in his 1950s childhood and everyone wanted to raise their kids in rambling houses with big leafy yards like the one he grew up in , not dinky apartments , and so the cornfields were given over to settlements of ramblers on curvy streets with romantic names like Yosemite Avenue , Emerald Trail , Everest Path , and Evening Star Way , and the earthmovers gouged out the interstates , the east west 94 , the north south 35 , and the downtowns dwindled and urban renewal wiped out whole blocks of Victorian stone edifices , old picture palaces , department stores . And the planners created an infernal system of skyways glass bridges connecting buildings at the second story in effect turning buildings inside out , wiping out streets of little shops and show windows and the hopeful proprietors in favor of implacable corporations with brutal blank exteriors ( he mourns this but learns not to see it ) . Instead , look up at the First National Bank building in St . Paul , the enormous 1st on the roof outlined in flashing red neon as a child , I thought it designated St . Paul as the number one city in America , a dazzling discovery for a boy who was brought up modest . Pride goeth before a fall , so deprecate yourself before others do the job for you . On the fourth grade class trip to the capitol , we all stood on the roof of the bank , and I explained the significance of the 1 as a yellow streetcar rolled past a grassy square with a fountain in the middle , old men lounging on park benches , smoking , looking into the distance . I wondered then what they were thinking , and now I am old enough to know . When a man has lived in one place for most of his life , he walks around hip deep in history . He sees that life is not so brief ; it is vast and contains multitudes . I drive down Seventh Street to a Twins game and pass the old Dayton 's department store ( Macy 's now but still Dayton 's to me ) , where in my poverty days I shoplifted an unabridged dictionary the size of a suitcase , and 50 years later I still feel the terror of walking out the door with it under my jacket , and I imagine the cops arresting my 20 year old self and what 30 days in the slammer mightve done for me . From my seat above first base , I see the meatpacking plant where those men wrestled beef carcasses into trucks and the old Munsingwear factory with the low rumble and whine of machines , and I remember an intense dread of spending one 's days at a power loom making men 's underwear . The building is today an enormous emporium of interior design showrooms , the place to go if you feel the urge to spend a hundred grand on a new bathroom , but to me it 's still the coal mine I was afraid Id spend my life in . I think about this along about the eighth inning if the Twins are down by a few runs . When we graduated from Anoka High , my classmate Corinne Guntzel drove her dad 's white Cadillac Eldorado convertible with rocket tail fins at high speed down the West River Road and into the city on a street just beyond right center field , and I stood in the front seat and sang , thatll be the day , when you say goodbye , oh , thatll be the day , when you make me cry , and now she and her parents , Hilmar and Helen , lie in Crystal Lake Cemetery on the north side beyond left field , my stalwart friends and supporters , in the ground ; thoughts of them click into place whenever I pass the Dowling Avenue exit on 94 . She was a suicide 28 years ago , drowned with rocks in her pockets , and I still love her and am not over her death , nor do I expect ever to be . If I drove by the cemetery with a visitor , I wouldnt say a word about this . Too much . Too painful . Her at the wheel , the summer wind in my face , the lights of Minneapolis passing , sweet love in the air . I would give the world to go back to that night and hold her in my arms . I drive my little girl to school , a lovely ritual , and the route takes me through my Dangerous Radical years and past the place where my virginity went up in flames at age 22 the house replaced by an on ramp to I 35W , the house that itself was an on ramp to me and past a steep slope below Ridgewood Avenue and the house where Mary and I decided not to be married anymore , only to find out that she was pregnant , so we decided not to not be married . A bell tolls as I pass . My daughter says , Tell me a story , so I tell her about riding the school bus in seventh grade , my gravel road the last stop , the bus packed with smelly children bundled in heavy mackinaws , no empty seats , nobody moving over , the whiskey soaked bus driver yelling at me to sit down , dammit , which is maybe why I have such a poor self image even today and flinch when people look at me and which naturally drove me into radio broadcasting instead of something more distinguished . She says , Tell me a funny story my daughter who never had to fight for a seat . I say , So  ... there were these two penguins standing on an ice floe , and she says , Tell the truth , so I say , I like your ponytail . You know , years ago I wore my hair in a ponytail . Not a big ponytail . A little one . I had a beard too . And she looks at me . A ponytail? Are you joking? No , I did . It was only for a year or two , around 1972 . And she realizes I am telling the truth . And she laughs and laughs . My father never drove me to school . It was unheard of back then , so he never got to know me that well , just as he never wore his hair in a ponytail . Back in his day men who wore their hair in a ponytail were given electroshock therapy , which made them forget what day of the week it was . Today is Monday , and I am driving my daughter past Lake Calhoun , where , back in the ponytail era , I went skinny dipping with a woman who now is a distinguished surgeon in town . If I ran into her today , I doubt that Id mention it , and yet whenever I drive this way , memory gives me a glimpse of her excellent bare back and buttocks . The great American myth is the hero who leaves home to remake himself in another place : James Gatz leaves North Dakota to become Jay Gatsby of West Egg , Long Island ; Robert Jordan leaves his teaching job in Montana to fight in the Spanish Civil War ; Huck Finn took a raft , Dorothy flew off in a tornado , Sister Carrie rode the train , Jack Kerouac hitched rides and so forth but in my experience the Cities have been quite roomy enough for a restless , impulsive person to live his life . I never felt stranded here . Sometimes I felt the pull of the roads going west , Highway 7 out of Excelsior and Clara City toward South Dakota , and Highway 212 through Chaska and Granite Falls , and Highway 12 through Litchfield and Willmar and Benson and Ortonville . And now and then , just for a taste of freedom , Id drive out west late at night through the little towns and stop around 2 or 3 a .m . at a crossroad and get out of the car and walk around in the dark for a while and then head back to do my 6 a .m . radio shift . After the university I spent part of a summer in New York City , thinking that a young writer ought to be there , but squalor did not appeal to me . I met an artist who painted by night and drove a cab by day , was hooked on marijuana and LSD , and lived in a tiny fourth floor walk up with a wife and two little daughters . I decided that Minnesota was a better place to be poor . You can go to your mother 's for a huge supper , and even if she doesnt approve of your life , shell send you home with a big bag of vegetables from her garden . Also it was a better place to be original behind the scrim of Midwesternness , the myth of the placid , backward hinterland than in ferocious Manhattan . When my mother was nearing the end of her 97 years , what was most vivid to her was her youth . She said , There is so much Id still like to know , and there 's nobody left to ask . So she ventured into the shadows to commune with her dead , which was a comfort to her . Nobody was alive who knew her in girlhood , so memory became reality . Some call it dementia , I call it imagination . At 71 I sometimes forget last week , but I clearly remember the big house on Dupont Avenue North where Corinne lived one summer when we were 19 , and I blew smoke on her African violets to kill aphids . She and I had this idea to form a commune of writers all working away in their rooms , doors open , and when we wrote something good , we could walk into someone 's room and tell them about it . A sort of long term sleepover . It was a perfect idea , and we didnt bother with details such as Who and Where and How much , and because it never became a reality , it never came crashing down . It still exists in my mind . If I reach 97 , I may finally go live there . My mother died in the front bedroom of the house Dad built in the cornfield after the war . He died in that room too , 11 years before her . It had been my bedroom . I used to sit on the bed and smoke , gazing at the red blinking light on a distant water tower , and imagine living in New York . My parents were very clear that they wished to die in their old house and not in a hospital . They wanted family to be with them at the end , holding their hands and singing , Abide with me ; fast falls the eventide , and Then we shall be where we would be , Then we shall be what we should be , as they passed to their heavenly home . The bedroom looks out on the driveway where Dad 's Ford station wagon used to be parked , ready to leave early the next morning to drive to Idaho to visit relatives . My mother stayed up late , washing , ironing , packing and repacking , in an ecstasy of anxiety . My father changed the oil , checked tire pressures , adjusted the timing . At sunrise , we were washed and combed , ready to go , and stood on the front lawn , watching him pack the car . They made a good team . He was laconic and undaunted , she was prone to excitation . We headed west on Highway 12 , the rising sun to our backs , as she deliberated the perpetual question : Had she turned the oven off? And decided she had and out onto the open prairie we went , with me sitting behind Mother narrating the trip from the old Federal Writers state guide . Now theyre buried in a little country cemetery full of aunts and uncles , grandparents , great grandparents , and someday , I presume , cousins and siblings . So how was it to grow up there then? they say . Oh , you know . It couldve been worse , I reply . We are not braggarts and blowhards back where I come from . But if you want to know the truth , I feel understood there . I sit down to lunch with Bill and Bob or my sister and brother whom Ive known almost forever , and it 's a conversation you cant have with people you met yesterday . You can flash back to 1954 and the island in the river where we used to mess around , or the front office you shared with Warren Feist that looked across the street to the Anoka Dairy , or the toboggan slope behind Corinne 's house , no footnote necessary , and they are right there with you . I come home and feel so well understood . I almost dont have to say a word . I was not a good person . I have yelled at my children . I neglected my parents and was disloyal to loved ones . I have offended righteous people . People around here know all this about me , and yet they still smile and say hello , and so every day I feel forgiven . Ask me if it 's a good place to live , and I dont know that 's real estate talk but forgiveness and understanding , that 's a beautiful combination . In 1418 the town fathers of Florence finally addressed a monumental problem theyd been ignoring for decades : the enormous hole in the roof of their cathedral . Season after season , the winter rains and summer sun had streamed in over Santa Maria del Fiore 's high altar or where the high altar should have been . Their predecessors had begun the church in 1296 to showcase the status of Florence as one of Europe 's economic and cultural capitals , grown rich on high finance and the wool and silk trades . It was later decided that the structure 's crowning glory would be the largest cupola on Earth , ensuring the church would be more useful and beautiful , more powerful and honorable than any other ever built , as the grandees of Florence decreed . Still , many decades later , no one seemed to have a viable idea of how to build a dome nearly 150 feet across , especially as it would have to start 180 feet above the ground , atop the existing walls . Other questions plagued the cathedral overseers . Their building plans eschewed the flying buttresses and pointed arches of the traditional Gothic style then favored by rival northern cities like Milan , Florence 's archenemy . Yet these were the only architectural solutions known to work in such a vast structure . Could a dome weighing tens of thousands of tons stay up without them? Was there enough timber in Tuscany for the scaffolding and templates that would be needed to shape the dome 's masonry? And could a dome be built at all on the octagonal floor plan dictated by the existing walls eight pie shaped wedges without collapsing inward as the masonry arced toward the apex? No one knew . So in 1418 the worried Florentine fathers announced a contest for the ideal dome design , with a handsome prize of 200 gold florins and a shot at eternal fame for the winner . Leading architects of the age flocked to Florence and presented their ideas . From start to finish , the project was so charged with doubts , fears , creative secrecy , and civic pride that a lush tapestry of legend was woven around it , turning the story of the cupola into a parable of Florentine ingenuity and a central creation myth of the Italian Renaissance . When the first histories were written , the losers came off particularly poorly . One contending architect , it was said , proposed to support the dome with an enormous pillar rising in the center of the church . Another suggested building it out of sponge stone ( perhaps spugna , a porous volcanic rock ) to minimize its weight . Yet another , according to early legend , proposed that a mountain of dirt mixed with coins serve as scaffolding , to be cleared away free of charge by the money grubbing citizenry after the dome was complete . What we know for sure is that another candidate , a short , homely , and hot tempered goldsmith named Filippo Brunelleschi , promised to build not one but two domes , one nested inside the other , without elaborate and expensive scaffolding . Yet he refused to explain how hed achieve this , fearing that a competitor would steal his ideas . Brunelleschi 's stubbornness led to a shouting match with the overseers , who twice had him restrained and forcibly ejected from the assembly , denouncing him as a buffoon and a babbler . Nonetheless , Brunelleschi 's mysterious design piqued their imagination perhaps because they already knew this buffoon and babbler to be a genius . As a boy , during his goldsmith 's apprenticeship , he had mastered drawing and painting , wood carving , sculpture in silver and bronze , stone setting , niello , and enamel work . Later he studied optics and tinkered endlessly with wheels , gears , weights , and motion , building a number of ingenious clocks , including what may have been one of the first alarm clocks in history . Applying his theoretical and mechanical knowledge to observation of the natural world , he single handedly worked out the rules of linear perspective . Hed just spent several years in Rome measuring and sketching the ancient monuments and noting , in cipher , their architectural secrets . Indeed , Brunelleschi 's life seemed to have been one long apprenticeship for building the dome of unequaled beauty , usefulness , honor , and power that Florence yearned for . The next year the overseers met with Brunelleschi several times , eliciting more details of his scheme . They began to realize just how brilliant ( and risky ) it really was . His dome would consist of two concentric shells , an inner one visible from within the cathedral nested inside a wider , taller external dome . To counteract hoop stress , the outward , bulging pressure created by a large structure 's weight that could cause it to crack or collapse , he would bind the walls with tension rings of stone , iron , and wood , like hoops on a barrel . Hed build the first 46 feet in stone , he said , after which he would continue with lighter materials , either spugna or brick . He also assured the overseers that he could do without conventional , ground based scaffolding . They welcomed the enormous savings in lumber and labor that would result , at least during work on the first 57 feet , after which everything would depend on how things went , because in building , only practical experience will teach that which is to be followed . In 1420 the overseers agreed to make Filippo Brunelleschi the provveditore , or superintendent , of the cupola project . They added one significant caveat . Being hardheaded merchants and bankers who believed in competition as a way of ensuring quality control , they appointed Lorenzo Ghiberti , Brunelleschi 's fellow goldsmith , as a co superintendent . The two men had been rivals since 1401 , when they had vied for another illustrious commission , the new bronze doors for the Florentine Baptistery . Ghiberti had won . ( Much later , an admiring Michelangelo would refer to a second set of Ghiberti 's doors as the Gates of Paradise . ) By this time , Ghiberti was the most illustrious and politically connected artist in Florence . Now Brunelleschi , whose design for the cupola had been accepted outright , was forced to work side by side with his gallingly successful rival . The arrangement would lead to much plotting and skulduggery . On this tempestuous note began the building of Il Cupolone ( the Big Dome ) , a monumental project whose growth over the next 16 years became the city 's drama in miniature . The dome 's progress was a reference point for life in the city events were predicted to occur and promises were to be kept before the Dome is covered . Its looming , rounded profile , so unlike the angular lines of the Gothic , symbolized the Florentine Republic 's freedom from tyrannous Milan , and even more so , the nascent Renaissance 's liberation from the airless constraints of the Middle Ages . The first problem to be solved was purely technical : No known lifting mechanisms were capable of raising and maneuvering the enormously heavy materials he had to work with , including sandstone beams , so far off the ground . Here Brunelleschi the clockmaker and tinkerer outdid himself . He invented a three speed hoist with an intricate system of gears , pulleys , screws , and driveshafts , powered by a single yoke of oxen turning a wooden tiller . It used a special rope 600 feet long and weighing over a thousand pounds custom made by shipwrights in Pisa and featured a groundbreaking clutch system that could reverse direction without having to turn the oxen around . Later Brunelleschi made other innovative lifting machines , including the castello , a 65 foot tall crane with a series of counterweights and hand screws to move loads laterally once theyd been raised to the right height . Brunelleschi 's lifts were so far ahead of their time that they werent rivaled until the industrial revolution , though they did fascinate generations of artists and inventors , including a certain Leonardo from the nearby Tuscan town of Vinci , whose sketchbooks tell us how they were made . Having assembled the necessary tool kit , Brunelleschi turned his full attention to the dome itself , which he shaped with a series of stunning technical innovations . His double shell design yielded a structure that was far lighter and loftier than a solid dome of such size would have been . He wove regular courses of herringbone brickwork , little known before his time , into the texture of the cupola , giving the entire structure additional solidity . Throughout the years of construction Brunelleschi spent more and more time on the work site . He oversaw the production of bricks of various dimensions and attended to the supply of choice stone and marble from the quarries . He led an army of masons and stonecutters , carpenters , blacksmiths , lead beaters , barrelmakers , water carriers , and other craftsmen . When they were puzzled by some tricky construction detail , one biographer tells us , hed shape a model out of wax or clay or carve up a turnip to illustrate what he wanted . Brunelleschi took particular care of his workers , both for their safety and to ensure that the dome progressed as rapidly as possible . He ordered that their wine be cut with water to keep them sharp on the heights ( this provision was revoked under pressure by dissatisfied workers ) and added parapets to the suspended platforms to prevent them from falling or looking down from the dizzying height of the dome . According to popular legend , Brunelleschi could also be a hard taskmaster . When masons went on strike demanding better pay , we are told , he called in scabs from Lombardy , and relented only when the masons returned , hats in hand , and agreed to resume their jobs at reduced wages . He also had to contend with highly placed adversaries , led by the scheming Lorenzo Ghiberti . Brunelleschi was the project 's conceptual and operational leader from the start , yet he and Ghiberti received the same yearly wage of 36 florins . Brunelleschi 's biographers tell an amusing tale about how he finally outmaneuvered Ghiberti . In the summer of 1423 , just before a wooden tension ring was to be laid around the dome , Brunelleschi suddenly took to his bed , complaining of severe pains in his side . When the baffled carpenters and masons asked how they were to position the enormous chestnut beams that made up the ring , he essentially delegated the task to his rival . Ghiberti had installed only some of the beams when Brunelleschi , miraculously on the mend , returned to the work site and pronounced Ghiberti 's work so incompetent that it would have to be torn out and replaced . Brunelleschi directed these repairs himself , complaining all the while to the overseers that his co superintendent was earning a salary he didnt deserve . Though this account may be tinged by hero worship , archival records at year 's end do name Brunelleschi the sole inventor and director of the cupola , and later his salary rose to a hundred florins a year , while Ghiberti continued at 36 florins . Ghiberti didnt give in . Around 1426 his assistant , the architect Giovanni da Prato , sent the overseers a large piece of vellum , still preserved in the National Archives of Florence , on which hed penned a detailed criticism of Brunelleschi 's work , complete with illustrations . He claimed that Brunelleschi , through ignorance and presumption , had deviated from the original plans for the cupola , which was therefore spoiled and put in danger of ruin . Giovanni also composed a violent personal attack on Brunelleschi in sonnet form . The poem calls Brunelleschi a dark , deep wellspring of ignorance and a miserable and imbecile beast whose plans were doomed to failure . If they ever succeeded , Giovanni rather rashly promised , he would kill himself . Brunelleschi replied with a barbed sonnet of his own , warning Giovanni to destroy his poems , lest they sound ridiculous when all the dancing starts , in celebration of that which he now thinks impossible . Brunelleschi and his workmen eventually did their victory dance , though only after several more years of doubt and struggle . In 1429 cracks appeared in the east end of the cathedral nave beside the dome , forcing Brunelleschi to shore up the walls with iron tie bars . In 1434 , perhaps at Ghiberti 's instigation , Brunelleschi was jailed on a technicality regarding unpaid union dues . But soon after , he was released , and the cupola continued skyward at the average rate of about one foot per month . On March 25 , 1436 , the Feast of the Annunciation , Pope Eugenius IV and an assembly of cardinals and bishops consecrated the finished cathedral , to the tolling of bells and cheering of proud Florentines . A decade later another illustrious group laid the cornerstone of the lantern , the decorative marble structure that Brunelleschi designed to crown his masterpiece . Soon after , on April 15 , 1446 , Brunelleschi died , apparently from a sudden illness . At his funeral he lay dressed in white linen on a bier ringed by candles , staring sightlessly into the dome he had built brick by brick , as the candle smoke and the notes of the funeral dirge spiraled into the void . He was buried in the crypt of the cathedral ; a memorial plaque nearby celebrated his divine intellect . These were high honors . Before Brunelleschi 's time , very few people , among them a saint , were allowed burial in the crypt , and architects were mostly considered humble craftsmen . With genius , leadership , and grit , Filippo Brunelleschi raised true artists to the rank of sublime creators , worthy of eternal praise in the company of the saints , an image that would dominate the Renaissance . In fact , he paved the way for the cultural and social revolutions of the Renaissance itself , through his complex synthesis of inspiration and analysis , his bold reworking of the classical past to the needs and aspirations of the present . Once complete , Santa Maria del Fiore was decorated by artists like Donatello , Paolo Uccello , and Luca Della Robbia , making it both the birthplace and the proving ground of the Renaissance . Brunelleschi 's dome still rises from the terra cotta sea of Florence 's roof tiles , itself terra cotta clad yet harmoniously proportioned , like a Greek goddess in homespun . It is mountainous yet strangely buoyant , as if the white marble ridges rising to its apex are ropes holding a zeppelin to Earth . Somehow Brunelleschi captured freedom in stone , exalting the Florentine skyline ever after with an upward yearning embodiment of the human spirit .